Event-Historical Aggregation:
Map-Reduce as Commitment in Spherepop
Flyxion
Abstract
This essay develops an event-historical semantics for distributed aggregation, recasting the classical
map-reduce paradigm as a process of irreversible commitment rather than value computation.
Working within the Spherepop calculus, computation is understood as a history of authorized,
replayable transformations whose meaning lies in the constraints they impose on future possibilities.
Mapping corresponds to the construction of local event histories that culminate in committed
summaries, while reduction is realized as a sequence of merge events that irreversibly bind these
local commitments into a durable global object.
The paper introduces a formal semantics for event-historical aggregation, derives algebraic
correctness properties for provenance-guarded reducers, and shows how associativity, commutativity,
and idempotence emerge only after quotienting histories by authorized collapse. Refusal is treated as
a ﬁrst-class semantic operator, rendering invalid aggregations ontologically inadmissible rather than
merely erroneous. The resulting framework subsumes classical map-reduce and CRDT semantics as
special cases while extending them with auditability, policy enforcement, and controlled forgetting.
1
Introduction
Map-reduce occupies a foundational role in distributed systems. Its enduring appeal lies in a simple
abstraction: large computations can be decomposed into local mappings over shards of data and
a reduction that aggregates partial results. Correctness, scalability, and parallelism are achieved
by requiring the reducer to satisfy algebraic properties such as associativity and, in many settings,
commutativity and idempotence.
Despite its practical success, the classical formulation of map-reduce is conceptually thin.
Aggregation is treated as a function from values to values, and the identity of the result is exhausted
by its ﬁnal numerical or symbolic content. Provenance, policy constraints, and correctness conditions
beyond pure algebra are relegated to informal assumptions or external mechanisms.
This paper argues that this value-centric framing obscures what aggregation actually does
in practice. Real distributed aggregation is not merely the calculation of a number; it is the
construction of a durable commitment about which inputs have been accepted, which combinations
are permitted, and which alternatives have been ruled out. These commitments persist across time,
shape future computation, and often carry normative or policy signiﬁcance.
1

Spherepop provides a calculus in which such commitments are explicit. In Spherepop, computa-
tion is event-sourced: objects are not deﬁned by their current state but by the irreversible history of
authorized events that brought them into being. Within this setting, map-reduce admits a natural
and precise reinterpretation. The map phase constructs many local histories, each culminating
in a committed summary. The reduce phase composes these histories through authorized merges,
producing a global object whose identity is inseparable from the commitments encoded in its lineage.
The contribution of this essay is threefold. First, it provides a rigorous event-historical semantics
for map-reduce in Spherepop. Second, it derives the algebraic correctness conditions of reducers as
emergent properties of provenance-guarded merge operations rather than as primitive assumptions.
Third, it demonstrates how refusal and controlled forgetting can be integrated directly into the
semantics of aggregation, yielding a framework that is both more expressive and more faithful to
real distributed practice.
2
Computation as Event History
Traditional programming models identify computation with the evaluation of functions over values.
A computation is correct if it produces the right output, and the internal steps leading to that
output are, at best, an implementation detail. In contrast, Spherepop treats computation as the
construction of a history. An object exists if and only if there is an authorized sequence of events
that introduces it, transforms it, and commits it as a fact of the world.
This event-historical stance entails a fundamental shift in semantics. The meaning of an object
is not given by its extensional content alone, but by the constraints its history imposes on future
computation. A committed object rules out alternative possibilities: once a pop event has occurred,
the system may no longer behave as though the committed fact were absent or diﬀerent.
Within this framework, aggregation cannot be understood as a mere operation on values.
Aggregation constructs an object whose identity records which inputs have been bound together and
under what conditions. The question "what value did we compute?" is secondary to the question
"what commitments have we made?"
Map-reduce, reinterpreted in this light, is a disciplined method for constructing global com-
mitments from local ones. Mapping produces locally committed facts; reduction binds those facts
together into a larger commitment that persists as a world-bearing artifact.
3
Mapping as Local Commitment
The map phase in Spherepop begins with the introduction of input shards as authorized objects.
Each shard is established as a legitimate participant in the computation through a commitment
event. A mapper then performs some local analysis over the shard. This analysis may be pure and
reversible at the level of ordinary computation, but its output becomes meaningful only when it is
committed.
Formally, a mapper produces a summary object whose existence is ﬁxed by a pop event. A
subsequent link event binds the summary to its originating shard, establishing provenance as a
2

structural property of the object rather than as external metadata. Once these events have occurred,
the mapper output cannot be silently rewritten or replaced without creating a new history.
The result of mapping is therefore a collection of objects that are independent in the sense that
their histories share no reduction commitments, yet grounded in the sense that each carries an
explicit lineage to the data that produced it. These objects form the raw material for reduction, not
as interchangeable values, but as historically situated facts.
4
Event-Historical Semantics
To reason rigorously about aggregation in Spherepop, we now introduce a formal semantics in which
computation is modeled as the construction and extension of event histories. The purpose of this
semantics is not to reproduce classical denotational or operational accounts, but to make precise
the sense in which aggregation derives its meaning from irreversible commitment rather than from
terminal values.
4.1
Histories and Authorization
Let E denote a ﬁxed set of primitive event types, including pop, link, merge, collapse, and
refuse. A history is a ﬁnite, totally ordered sequence
H = (e1, e2, . . . , en),
where each ei ∈E. Histories are constructed incrementally: at each step, a candidate event may or
may not be admissible, depending on the history constructed so far.
Authorization is taken as a primitive relation
auth(H, e),
which holds when the event e is permitted as an extension of the history H. Authorization subsumes
typing constraints, policy rules, domain invariants, and resource conditions. Crucially, authorization
is evaluated with respect to the entire preﬁx history, not merely the current state of some object.
Deﬁnition 1 (Admissible Extension). Given a history H and an event e, the extension H · e is
admissible if and only if auth(H, e) holds.
If an event is not authorized, no successor history exists. This absence is not modeled as an
error state, but as a lack of admissible continuation.
4.2
Replay Semantics
The meaning of a history is given by its replay. Let
H
3

denote the object induced by replaying the events of H in order. Replay is a partial function from
histories to objects: it is deﬁned only for admissible histories. Two histories that diﬀer syntactically
may nevertheless replay to objects that are semantically equivalent under collapse, as discussed
below.
Objects are therefore intensional: their identity depends on the history that produced them, not
merely on an extensional value.
Remark 1. This contrasts with state-based semantics, where histories are erased once their eﬀects
are incorporated into a state.
In Spherepop, history is never erased implicitly; it can only be
transformed or quotienting via explicit events.
4.3
Commitment and Monotonicity
Commitment is introduced through the pop event. Informally, a pop asserts that an object now
exists as a fact of the world and may be referenced by future events.
Deﬁnition 2 (Commitment). An object x is committed at history H if H contains a pop(x) event.
Commitment is irreversible in the following precise sense.
Proposition 1 (Monotonicity of Commitment). If an object x is committed at history H, then for
any admissible extension H′ ⪰H, x remains committed in H′.
Proof. By deﬁnition, commitment is witnessed by the presence of a pop(x) event in the history.
Since histories are extended only by appending events, no admissible extension can remove or
negate a prior pop(x). Therefore, once committed, x remains committed in all admissible future
histories.
This monotonicity property formalizes the intuitive notion that commitment rules out alternative
futures in which the committed fact did not occur.
4.4
Refusal as Semantic Partiality
Refusal plays a central role in the semantics of aggregation. Rather than being an exceptional
outcome within the system, refusal is modeled as the absence of an authorized extension.
Deﬁnition 3 (Refusal). Given a history H and a candidate event e, refusal occurs when auth(H, e)
does not hold. In this case, no history H · e exists.
In particular, a refuse annotation may be used to document the reason for inadmissibility, but
it does not create a successor object. Refusal is therefore ontological rather than operational: the
forbidden aggregation simply cannot happen.
Theorem 1 (No Recovery from Refusal). If an event e is refused at history H, then there exists no
history H′ extending H in which the eﬀects of e are realized.
4

Proof. By deﬁnition, refusal means that H · e is not admissible. Since all histories are constructed
by admissible extensions, and no alternative event can realize the same eﬀects without violating
authorization, there exists no admissible history extending H in which the eﬀects attributed to e
occur.
This theorem captures the distinction between refusal and error handling. An error may be
corrected or compensated for in later computation. A refusal precludes the existence of any history
in which the forbidden act took place.
4.5
Collapse and Equivalence of Histories
While histories are never implicitly erased, Spherepop permits explicit, authorized forgetting
through collapse events. Collapse deﬁnes an equivalence relation on histories that preserves
selected invariants while discarding others.
Deﬁnition 4 (Collapse Equivalence). Given a set of invariants I, a collapse operation induces
an equivalence relation ≡I on histories such that H ≡I H′ if and only if H and H′ agree on all
invariants in I.
Collapse is irreversible and idempotent: once distinctions are forgotten, they cannot be recovered
by further admissible extensions.
Proposition 2 (Idempotence of Collapse). If H collapses to H′ under invariants I, then collapsing
H′ again under I yields H′.
Proof. By deﬁnition, H′ already satisﬁes the equivalence constraints induced by I. A second
collapse under the same invariants cannot identify any further distinctions and therefore leaves H′
unchanged.
This completes the core semantic framework. With histories, authorization, commitment, refusal,
and collapse formally deﬁned, we can now turn to the semantics of aggregation itself and derive the
algebraic properties of reducers as theorems rather than assumptions.
5
Merge Semantics and Reducer Construction
With the event-historical framework in place, we now give a precise semantics for reduction by
merge. The central claim of this section is that reducer correctness properties traditionally assumed
as algebraic axioms arise, in Spherepop, as consequences of authorization, provenance constraints,
and collapse.
5.1
Reducer Objects and Provenance
A reducer object is an object whose history includes one or more merge events. Semantically, a
reducer object represents a commitment that binds together a collection of mapper outputs. Each
reducer therefore carries both a payload and a provenance component.
5

Deﬁnition 5 (Reducer Summary). A reducer summary is a pair (v, P), where v is a semantic
payload and P is a ﬁnite set of shard identiﬁers indicating provenance.
The interpretation of the payload v is domain-speciﬁc. For example, in a word-count application
it may be a frequency table, while in numerical aggregation it may be a sum or vector. Provenance,
by contrast, has a ﬁxed semantic role: it constrains admissible composition.
5.2
Merge as an Authorized Extension
A merge is an event that takes two existing objects—typically a current reducer and a mapper
output—and produces a new reducer object whose history extends the histories of its inputs.
Deﬁnition 6 (Merge Authorization). Let (v1, P1) and (v2, P2) be reducer summaries. The merge
event merge((v1, P1), (v2, P2)) is authorized if and only if P1 ∩P2 = ∅.
When authorized, the merge produces a new summary
(v1, P1) ⊕(v2, P2) = (v1 ⋄v2, P1 ∪P2),
where ⋄is a binary operation on payloads. When the authorization condition fails, the merge is
refused and no successor history exists.
Remark 2. The authorization condition enforces a strong correctness guarantee: each shard may
contribute at most once to a reducer history. Duplication is therefore not handled by idempotence at
the value level, but excluded at the level of admissible histories.
5.3
Monotonicity and Irreversibility of Reduction
Reduction by merge is monotone in a precise sense: each authorized merge strictly extends the set
of commitments encoded in the reducer history.
Proposition 3 (Monotonic Growth of Provenance). Let r be a reducer summary with provenance
P. If r′ is obtained from r by an authorized merge with a mapper output whose provenance is Q,
then the provenance of r′ is P ∪Q, and P ⊊P ∪Q.
Proof. By merge deﬁnition, P ∩Q = ∅and the resulting provenance is their union. Since Q is
nonempty for any nontrivial mapper output, the union is a strict superset of P.
This strict growth property implies irreversibility.
Theorem 2 (Non-Reversibility of Merge). Let r′ be obtained from r by an authorized merge. There
exists no admissible history extending the history of r′ in which the commitments introduced by that
merge are undone.
Proof. Undoing the merge would require either removing provenance elements from the summary or
negating the eﬀect of a prior pop event. Neither operation is authorized under the event-historical
semantics, as histories may only be extended, not rewritten. Therefore no admissible extension can
reverse the commitments introduced by the merge.
6

5.4
Associativity up to Collapse
Classical reducers rely on associativity to permit reordering and parallel combination of inputs. In
Spherepop, merge is not strictly associative at the level of histories, since diﬀerent merge orders
produce distinct event sequences. Associativity instead emerges at the level of collapsed objects.
Deﬁnition 7 (Associativity up to Collapse). Let m1, m2, m3 be mapper outputs with pairwise
disjoint provenance. Merge is associative up to collapse if the reducer objects obtained by
((m1 ⊕m2) ⊕m3)
and
(m1 ⊕(m2 ⊕m3))
are equivalent under an authorized collapse that preserves payload and provenance invariants.
Theorem 3 (Associativity of Provenance-Guarded Merge). If the payload operation ⋄is associative
and commutative, then merge is associative up to collapse.
Proof. Both merge trees produce reducer summaries with identical payload v1 ⋄v2 ⋄v3 and identical
provenance P1∪P2∪P3. The only diﬀerence lies in the internal structure of their histories. A collapse
that preserves payload and provenance invariants identiﬁes these histories, yielding equivalent reducer
objects.
This result justiﬁes parallel and incremental reduction without erasing the historical information
that distinguishes diﬀerent execution paths.
5.5
Commutativity and Structural Symmetry
A similar argument establishes commutativity up to collapse.
Proposition 4 (Commutativity up to Collapse). If ⋄is commutative, then for any two mapper
outputs m1 and m2 with disjoint provenance, the reducer objects obtained by merging m1 into m2
and m2 into m1 are equivalent under collapse.
Proof. The two merge orders produce summaries with identical payload and provenance. As in the
associative case, a collapse preserving these invariants identiﬁes the resulting histories.
5.6
Idempotence via Refusal
Idempotence is often required to tolerate duplicate inputs. In Spherepop, this property arises from
refusal rather than from algebraic absorption.
Theorem 4 (Idempotence by Inadmissibility). Let m be a mapper output with provenance P.
Attempting to merge m into a reducer whose provenance already includes P is refused. Consequently,
each mapper output can contribute to a reducer at most once.
Proof. If P ⊆Pr, then P ∩Pr ̸= ∅, violating the merge authorization condition. The merge is
therefore inadmissible, and no successor history exists in which the duplicate contribution occurs.
This completes the derivation of the classical algebraic properties of reducers as consequences of
event-historical semantics rather than as primitive axioms. Reduction is thus revealed as a process
of constructing increasingly constrained objects through authorized composition.
7

6
Incremental and Streaming Reduction
A salient advantage of event-historical aggregation is that it supports incremental and streaming
computation without additional machinery. Because each merge yields a new committed reducer
object rather than mutating an existing one, aggregation naturally unfolds as a monotone sequence
of commitments indexed by time.
Let {mi}i≥1 be a potentially unbounded stream of mapper outputs with pairwise disjoint
provenance. An incremental reducer constructs a sequence of reducer objects {ri}i≥0 such that r0 is
an explicitly committed empty summary and
ri+1 = ri ⊕mi+1
whenever the merge is authorized. Each ri is a distinct object with its own history, and the transition
from ri to ri+1 is marked by a merge followed by a pop.
Proposition 5 (Preﬁx Soundness). For any i < j, the reducer object ri represents a sound
aggregation of the preﬁx {m1, . . . , mi} of the input stream.
Proof. By construction, ri is obtained by a sequence of authorized merges starting from r0 and
incorporating exactly the mapper outputs m1 through mi. Authorization ensures that no mapper
output outside this preﬁx can be included, and monotonicity of commitment ensures that no included
output can be removed.
This preﬁx property implies that at any moment the reducer exposes a coherent, auditable
snapshot of the aggregation so far, without requiring global synchronization or quiescence.
7
Checkpointing and Rollback as Event Construction
Checkpointing in Spherepop does not require copying state or persisting mutable variables. To
checkpoint a computation is simply to name a particular reducer object and record its identity.
Because reducer objects are immutable once committed, a checkpoint is a stable reference to a
speciﬁc history.
Rollback, correspondingly, is not a reversal of time. It is the construction of a new branch
of history that resumes aggregation from an earlier checkpoint. Formally, let rk be a previously
committed reducer object. A rollback resumes computation by using rk as the base reducer for
subsequent merges, thereby producing a new sequence {r′
i} whose histories extend that of rk but
not that of later reducer objects.
Theorem 5 (Rollback without Reversal). Rollback does not violate irreversibility: no committed
reducer object is destroyed or undone by resuming from an earlier checkpoint.
Proof. Rollback constructs new histories that extend an earlier committed history. Later histories
remain intact and committed, but are no longer extended along the new branch. Since no history is
shortened or rewritten, irreversibility is preserved.
8

This treatment of rollback aligns aggregation with versioned data structures and persistent
computation, while retaining explicit causal semantics.
8
Controlled Forgetting via Collapse
While histories are semantically signiﬁcant, unbounded growth of reducer histories is neither
necessary nor desirable. Spherepop addresses this through explicit collapse events that authorize
forgetting under speciﬁed invariants.
A collapse operation takes a reducer object with history H and produces a new object with
history H′ such that H ≡I H′ for a declared set of invariants I. Typical invariants include payload
totals and provenance sets, while internal merge structure is often dispensable.
Proposition 6 (Safety of Collapse). If a collapse preserves payload and provenance invariants,
then any property of the reducer that depends only on these invariants is preserved under collapse.
Proof. By deﬁnition of collapse equivalence, the replay of H and H′ agree on all invariants in I.
Any property deﬁnable solely in terms of these invariants therefore has the same truth value for
both objects.
Collapse is itself an irreversible commitment. Once a history has been collapsed, the distinctions
it discards cannot be recovered by further admissible extensions.
Theorem 6 (Irreversibility of Forgetting). There exists no admissible history extending a collapsed
history that restores discarded distinctions.
Proof. Restoring discarded distinctions would require introducing information not derivable from the
preserved invariants. Since admissible extensions may only operate on existing committed objects
and events, and collapse explicitly forgets those distinctions, no authorized event can reconstruct
them.
This explicit treatment of forgetting distinguishes Spherepop from systems in which optimization
silently erases causal structure.
9
Auditability and Lineage Guarantees
A principal motivation for event-historical aggregation is auditability. Because reducer objects
retain their histories unless explicitly collapsed, it is always possible to reconstruct the lineage of an
aggregate.
Theorem 7 (Lineage Completeness). Let r be a reducer object whose history has not been collapsed
with respect to provenance. Then the set of mapper outputs contributing to r is uniquely recoverable
from its history.
Proof. Each authorized merge introduces explicit links from the new reducer object to both its
prior reducer and the mapper output being incorporated. By traversing these links recursively, one
9

can enumerate all mapper outputs contributing to r. Authorization ensures that no mapper output
appears more than once.
Even after collapse, auditability can be preserved at a coarser granularity by retaining provenance
invariants. The choice of invariants thus determines the resolution at which auditability is maintained.
Taken together, incremental reduction, checkpointing, rollback, and controlled forgetting demon-
strate that Spherepop supports the practical requirements of distributed aggregation while preserving
a principled semantic account of commitment and history.
10
Worked Examples of Event-Historical Aggregation
This section presents concrete instances of map-reduce expressed in the event-historical semantics
of Spherepop. The goal is to demonstrate that common distributed aggregation tasks arise naturally
from the merge calculus, while exhibiting properties—such as refusal and explicit provenance—that
are diﬃcult to express in value-centric models.
10.1
Word Frequency Aggregation
Consider a corpus partitioned into shards {si}. Each shard contains a ﬁnite sequence of tokens. A
mapper processes shard si to produce a local frequency map hi : Σ →N together with provenance
Pi = {i}.
The mapper output is committed via a pop event and linked to its shard. The reducer aggregates
these outputs using merge. The payload operation ⋄is pointwise addition of frequency maps, which
is associative and commutative.
Theorem 8 (Correctness of Word Count Aggregation). Let rn be the reducer object obtained by
merging mapper outputs m1, . . . , mn with pairwise disjoint provenance. Then the payload of rn
assigns to each word w ∈Σ the total number of occurrences of w across shards s1, . . . , sn.
Proof. By induction on n. The base case n = 0 holds trivially for the empty reducer. Assume
correctness for rn. Merging mn+1 adds hn+1 to the payload via ⋄, yielding correct totals over all
n + 1 shards. Provenance guarantees that no shard is counted twice.
Attempting to re-merge a mapper output whose shard has already contributed is refused,
preventing duplication at the semantic level.
10.2
Group-By Aggregation
Group-by operations can be expressed by lifting reducers to keyed families. A mapper emits pairs
(k, m), where k is a key and m a mapper output for that key. The reducer maintains a map from
keys to reducer objects, each governed by its own provenance constraints.
Proposition 7 (Independent Key Aggregation). Reducer histories for distinct keys are independent,
and merges for one key do not aﬀect the admissibility of merges for another.
10

Proof. Provenance sets are disjoint across keys by construction, and merge authorization is checked
per reducer object. Therefore histories evolve independently.
This decomposition preserves parallelism while maintaining event-historical auditability per key.
11
Relation to CRDT Semantics
Conﬂict-free replicated data types (CRDTs) provide a widely adopted framework for distributed
aggregation without coordination. At ﬁrst glance, Spherepop reducers appear similar, as both rely
on associative and commutative combination rules. However, the semantic commitments of the two
frameworks diﬀer fundamentally.
CRDT semantics are state-based or operation-based but ultimately value-centric. Correctness
is expressed as eventual convergence: replicas that receive the same set of updates, possibly in
diﬀerent orders, converge to the same state. The causal history of updates is instrumental rather
than meaningful.
Spherepop, by contrast, treats histories as ﬁrst-class semantic objects. Merge is an irreversible
commitment that constructs a new object whose identity records which inputs were accepted and
how. Convergence, when desired, is realized via explicit collapse rather than implicit erasure of
history.
11.1
Embedding CRDTs into Spherepop
Despite these diﬀerences, CRDTs can be embedded into Spherepop under suitable restrictions.
Theorem 9 (CRDT Embedding). Any state-based CRDT whose join operation is associative,
commutative, and idempotent can be represented as a Spherepop reducer by imposing the following
constraints: refusal rules are disabled, provenance is ignored or collapsed immediately, and collapse
is applied eagerly after each merge.
Proof. Under these constraints, each merge produces a reducer object that immediately collapses to
a canonical representative of its payload state. Since collapse erases history, only the join-semilattice
structure remains. Associativity, commutativity, and idempotence of the join operation ensure
convergence equivalent to that of the original CRDT.
This embedding shows that Spherepop strictly generalizes CRDT semantics.
11.2
Limits of CRDT Expressiveness
The converse embedding does not hold. CRDTs cannot express refusal, policy constraints that
render certain merges inadmissible, or explicit forgetting as a committed act.
Theorem 10 (Strict Extension). There exist Spherepop reducers that cannot be faithfully represented
as CRDTs.
11

Proof. Consider a reducer with provenance-guarded merge that refuses duplicate shard contributions.
CRDT idempotence absorbs duplicates silently, whereas Spherepop renders them inadmissible. No
CRDT state transition can distinguish refusal from successful idempotent merge, so no faithful
representation exists.
This result highlights the semantic gain of event-historical aggregation: it allows distributed
computation to encode normative and policy constraints directly in its semantics.
12
Attention as Aggregation on Graphs
The map-reduce interpretation developed thus far extends beyond classical batch aggregation. In this
section, we show that the core mechanism of an attention head, as used in transformer architectures,
can be reconstructed as a particular form of aggregation over a graph. This reconstruction clariﬁes
the structural role of attention and prepares the ground for an event-historical reinterpretation.
Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph whose nodes represent tokens, entities, or states, and whose
edges represent potential interactions. Each node i ∈V carries an embedding vector xi ∈Rd.
A graph neural network (GNN) updates node representations by aggregating information from
neighbors. In its most general form, a GNN layer computes
hi = φ

xi,
M
j∈N(i)
ψ(xi, xj, eij)

,
where N(i) denotes the neighborhood of i, ψ computes a message from neighbor j to i, ⊕is an
aggregation operator, and φ produces the updated representation.
Attention mechanisms instantiate a particular choice of ψ and ⊕in which the contribution of
each neighbor is weighted by a learned relevance score. The critical observation is that attention is
not fundamentally a sequence operation; it is a structured aggregation over a graph whose edges are
dynamically reweighted.
13
Constructing an Attention Head on a Graph
An attention head may be deﬁned on a graph by introducing three linear maps:
Q : Rd →Rdk,
K : Rd →Rdk,
V : Rd →Rdv.
For each node i, the query, key, and value vectors are given by
qi = Qxi,
ki = Kxi,
vi = V xi.
Given a directed edge (i, j) ∈E, the compatibility between i and j is computed as
αij =
exp(⟨qi, kj⟩)
P
k∈N(i) exp(⟨qi, kk⟩).
12

The updated node representation is then
hi =
X
j∈N(i)
αijvj.
This computation is a weighted reduction over the neighborhood of i. The softmax normalization
enforces a simplex constraint, ensuring that attention weights sum to one. From an algebraic
perspective, attention is therefore a convex aggregation of neighbor values, parameterized by learned
compatibility functions.
Remark 3. Nothing in this construction depends essentially on linear order. Transformers can be
understood as GNNs operating on complete graphs with positional or causal masking.
14
Event-Historical Interpretation of Attention
The standard attention formulation is value-centric. It computes a weighted sum and discards
the intermediate relevance structure once the output vector is produced. From an event-historical
perspective, this erasure is semantically signiﬁcant.
We reinterpret attention in Spherepop by treating each attention head as a reducer operating over
a graph-indexed collection of mapper outputs. Each node j produces a mapper output consisting of
its value vector vj together with provenance identifying the source node. The attention head at
node i performs a reduction over these mapper outputs.
The attention weights αij are not merely coeﬃcients but encode a policy of admissible inﬂuence.
In Spherepop terms, they deﬁne which merges are authorized and with what relative strength. A
sharp attention distribution corresponds to a near-exclusive commitment to a small subset of inputs,
while a diﬀuse distribution corresponds to a weaker, more distributed commitment.
Deﬁnition 8 (Attention as Weighted Merge). An attention head induces a merge operation in
which the payload combination operator ⋄is a weighted sum, and authorization is governed by the
attention mask and normalization constraints.
Under this interpretation, computing hi corresponds to constructing a reducer object whose
history records which neighbors were attended to and under what weights. Standard transformers
immediately collapse this history, retaining only the ﬁnal vector. Spherepop makes this collapse
explicit and optional.
15
Attention, Refusal, and Masking
Attention masks, commonly used to enforce causality or sparsity, acquire a natural interpretation
as refusal rules. If an edge (i, j) is masked, then the corresponding merge is inadmissible: node j
cannot contribute to the reducer history of node i.
Proposition 8 (Masking as Refusal). Let (i, j) be a masked edge. Then any attempted merge
incorporating vj into the reducer at i is refused.
13

Proof. Masking enforces αij = 0 by construction. In event-historical terms, this corresponds to the
absence of authorization for the merge event involving j. No admissible history exists in which j
contributes to i.
This reframing highlights a limitation of standard attention: refusal is encoded numerically
rather than structurally. A masked edge contributes a zero vector, but the system cannot distinguish
between principled exclusion and accidental irrelevance.
16
Multi-Head Attention as Parallel Reducers
Multi-head attention decomposes aggregation into multiple parallel reducers, each operating with
its own query, key, and value projections. In Spherepop terms, each head constructs a distinct
reducer history over the same set of mapper outputs.
Proposition 9 (Independence of Attention Heads). Reducer histories corresponding to distinct
attention heads are independent and may be collapsed or audited separately.
Proof. Each head uses a distinct payload operation determined by its projections (Qh, Kh, Vh). Since
no merge events are shared across heads, their histories are disjoint and evolve independently.
The concatenation and projection step following multi-head attention may be understood as
a higher-level merge that binds these parallel reducer objects into a single representation, again
followed by collapse in standard practice.
17
Limits of Value-Centric Attention
From the event-historical viewpoint, standard attention mechanisms systematically erase the very
information that makes aggregation meaningful: which inputs were considered, which were excluded,
and how strongly each inﬂuenced the result. All such structure is collapsed immediately into a
vector.
This explains a number of empirical phenomena observed in transformer models, including
sensitivity to prompt phrasing, instability under long-horizon composition, and diﬃculty enforcing
hard constraints. These are not merely optimization issues, but consequences of treating attention
as a value computation rather than as a commitment-forming process.
Spherepop suggests an alternative research direction: attention mechanisms that retain, at
least partially, their event histories, enabling explicit refusal, auditable inﬂuence, and controlled
forgetting.
18
A Categorical Semantics of Event-Historical Aggregation
The event-historical semantics developed in the preceding sections admits a natural categorical for-
mulation that clariﬁes the structural commitments of Spherepop and uniﬁes map-reduce, streaming
aggregation, and attention under a single formal lens. This categorical perspective does not replace
14

the event-level semantics; rather, it abstracts from it while preserving the essential asymmetries
introduced by commitment, refusal, and collapse.
18.1
The Category of Event Histories
We deﬁne a category H whose objects are event histories modulo authorized collapse. Two histories
are identiﬁed when they are equivalent under a declared set of invariants. Morphisms in H are
authorized extensions of histories: a morphism H →H′ exists if and only if H′ can be constructed
from H by a ﬁnite sequence of authorized events.
Identity morphisms correspond to empty extensions, and composition is given by concatenation
of event sequences. Because authorization is history-dependent, composition in H is partial: not all
pairs of morphisms are composable.
Remark 4. This partiality is essential. It encodes refusal as the absence of a morphism, rather
than as a morphism to an error object. Invalid aggregations therefore do not merely fail; they are
unrepresentable.
18.2
Merge as a Partial Monoidal Structure
Merge induces a monoidal structure on H, but one that is partial and policy-dependent. When
two objects H1 and H2 have compatible provenance, their tensor product H1 ⊗H2 is deﬁned as the
history obtained by merging them. The empty reducer object serves as the monoidal unit.
Associativity and symmetry of this tensor hold only up to collapse. That is, H is not a strict
monoidal category but a monoidal category modulo a quotient functor induced by collapse. This
precisely mirrors the earlier result that reducer correctness properties hold only after identifying
histories that preserve the same invariants.
18.3
Refusal as Non-Existence of Morphisms
In this categorical setting, refusal corresponds to the non-existence of a morphism. If merging
two objects violates authorization constraints, then no morphism exists that would compose them.
This design choice has important consequences. It ensures that invalid constructions cannot be
accidentally composed with subsequent operations, and it renders correctness a structural property
rather than a runtime condition.
18.4
Collapse as a Quotient Functor
Collapse is formalized as a functor
CI : H →HI
that maps histories to equivalence classes preserving a chosen set of invariants I. This functor is
idempotent and non-invertible. Applying collapse forgets distinctions permanently, but the fact
that forgetting occurred remains visible in the history as a committed event.
Diﬀerent choices of I yield diﬀerent quotient categories, corresponding to diﬀerent trade-oﬀs
between ﬁdelity and tractability.
15

19
Map-Reduce and Attention as Monoidal Folding
From the categorical perspective, map-reduce is a fold over a family of objects in H. Mapping
produces a collection of independent objects, while reduction folds them using the monoidal structure
induced by merge. Unlike classical folds, this folding operation is constrained by authorization and
may be partial.
Attention mechanisms ﬁt naturally into this picture. An attention head is a parameterized
fold over a graph-indexed family of objects, where the fold weights are determined by learned
compatibility functions. Standard transformers instantiate a fold followed immediately by collapse,
erasing the event structure.
Multi-head attention corresponds to parallel folds, whose results are themselves merged at a
higher level. This hierarchical folding structure mirrors the layered architecture of modern neural
networks while exposing the points at which semantic commitments are made and then forgotten.
20
Conclusion and Future Directions
This essay has developed an event-historical account of distributed aggregation, recasting map-
reduce as a process of irreversible commitment rather than as a function on values. Within the
Spherepop calculus, mapping constructs local histories that culminate in committed summaries,
while reduction composes these histories through authorized merges. Classical algebraic properties
of reducers emerge not as axioms but as theorems, holding only up to authorized collapse.
By treating refusal as semantic partiality and collapse as explicit forgetting, the framework
accommodates policy constraints, auditability, and controlled abstraction as ﬁrst-class concerns.
Streaming aggregation, checkpointing, and rollback arise naturally from the immutability of com-
mitted histories.
Extending the analysis to attention mechanisms reveals that attention is itself a form of
aggregation whose semantic structure is obscured by value-centric implementations. Interpreting
attention as event-historical folding exposes the cost of immediate collapse and suggests new
directions for architectures that retain, reason over, and selectively forget their own commitments.
Several avenues for future work present themselves. One direction is the design of attention
mechanisms and graph neural networks that preserve partial event histories to enable explicit refusal
and auditability. Another is the integration of event-historical aggregation with learning dynamics,
treating training itself as a sequence of commitments rather than as gradient descent in parameter
space. Finally, the categorical framework developed here invites connections to traced monoidal
categories, persistent data structures, and semantics of irreversible computation.
More broadly, event-historical aggregation oﬀers a way to align distributed systems, machine
learning architectures, and semantic computation around a shared notion of meaning as constraint.
Aggregates are no longer ephemeral values, but durable objects whose identities encode how the
world was allowed to become the way it is.
16

A
Algebraic Properties of Provenance-Guarded Reducers
This appendix provides formal proofs of the algebraic properties attributed to Spherepop reducers
in the main text. The objective is to show that associativity, commutativity, and idempotence arise
as derived properties of event-historical constraints, rather than as axioms imposed on reducer
functions.
A.1
Reducer Domain and Partiality
Let S denote a countable set of shard identiﬁers. A reducer summary is a pair (v, P) where v ∈V
is a payload drawn from some carrier set V and P ⊆S is a ﬁnite provenance set.
Let ⋄: V × V →V be a binary operation on payloads.
Deﬁnition 9 (Admissible Merge). The merge operation ⊕is a partial binary operation on reducer
summaries deﬁned by
(v1, P1) ⊕(v2, P2)
if and only if P1 ∩P2 = ∅, in which case
(v1, P1) ⊕(v2, P2) := (v1 ⋄v2, P1 ∪P2).
If P1 ∩P2 ̸= ∅, the merge is undeﬁned.
Undeﬁnedness corresponds exactly to refusal in the event-historical semantics.
A.2
Monotonicity and Strict Growth
Proposition 10 (Strict Provenance Growth). If (v′, P ′) = (v, P) ⊕(w, Q) is deﬁned, then P ⊊P ′.
Proof. Since Q is nonempty for any mapper output and P ∩Q = ∅, we have P ′ = P ∪Q with
P ⊊P ′.
[No Cycles in Reducer Histories] Reducer histories are acyclic with respect to merge ancestry.
Proof. Each merge strictly increases provenance size. Since provenance sets are ﬁnite, no reducer
can be its own ancestor.
A.3
Associativity up to Collapse
Let mi = (vi, Pi) for i ∈{1, 2, 3} with pairwise disjoint provenance.
Theorem 11 (Associativity up to Provenance-Preserving Equivalence). If ⋄is associative, then
(m1 ⊕m2) ⊕m3
and
m1 ⊕(m2 ⊕m3)
are both deﬁned and equivalent under the equivalence relation
(v, P) ∼(v′, P ′) ⇐⇒v = v′ ∧P = P ′.
17

Proof. Both expressions are deﬁned because provenance sets are pairwise disjoint. Associativity of
⋄ensures
(v1 ⋄v2) ⋄v3 = v1 ⋄(v2 ⋄v3),
and set union is associative, yielding identical provenance P1 ∪P2 ∪P3.
Remark 5. The histories producing these results diﬀer syntactically, but collapse identiﬁes them
by quotienting over internal merge structure.
A.4
Commutativity
Theorem 12 (Commutativity up to Collapse). If ⋄is commutative, then for any two summaries
with disjoint provenance,
m1 ⊕m2 ∼m2 ⊕m1.
Proof. Commutativity of ⋄implies v1 ⋄v2 = v2 ⋄v1, and set union is commutative. Provenance
equality follows.
A.5
Idempotence via Inadmissibility
Theorem 13 (Idempotence by Partiality). For any reducer summary m = (v, P),
m ⊕m
is undeﬁned.
Proof. Since P ∩P = P ̸= ∅, the admissibility condition fails.
[Semantic Idempotence] Each mapper output contributes to a reducer at most once.
Remark 6. Unlike algebraic idempotence, this property is enforced structurally. Duplicate inputs
do not collapse to the same value; they are forbidden from occurring.
A.6
Resulting Algebraic Structure
Theorem 14 (Reducer Quotient Structure). Let ∼be the provenance-preserving equivalence relation.
The quotient (R/∼, ⊕) forms a commutative monoid.
Proof. Associativity and commutativity hold up to ∼. The empty reducer (v0, ∅) serves as identity.
Partiality disappears in the quotient because undeﬁned merges correspond to excluded elements.
Remark 7. This monoid exists only after quotienting by collapse. At the level of histories, no total
algebraic structure exists.
18

B
Embedding CRDT Semantics into Event-Historical Aggrega-
tion
This appendix formalizes the relationship between conﬂict-free replicated data types (CRDTs) and
Spherepop reducers. The central results are twofold. First, CRDTs embed into Spherepop under
speciﬁc semantic restrictions. Second, this embedding is strict: there exist Spherepop reducers that
cannot be faithfully represented as CRDTs.
B.1
Preliminaries on CRDTs
We consider state-based CRDTs, as they admit the clearest algebraic characterization. A state-based
CRDT is deﬁned by a triple (S, ⊔, ≤) where (S, ≤) is a join-semilattice and ⊔: S × S →S is the
least upper bound operation.
Updates are monotone with respect to ≤, and replicas periodically exchange states, merging
them via ⊔. Correctness is expressed as convergence: replicas that have received the same set of
updates converge to the same state, independent of order or duplication.
B.2
CRDTs as Collapsed Reducers
We now show that CRDT semantics arise as a degenerate case of Spherepop aggregation in which
history is aggressively collapsed.
Deﬁnition 10 (CRDT-Compatible Spherepop Reducer). A Spherepop reducer is CRDT-compatible
if it satisﬁes the following constraints:
1. The payload carrier V forms a join-semilattice.
2. The merge payload operation ⋄coincides with ⊔.
3. Provenance is either absent or collapsed immediately after each merge.
4. No refusal rules are enforced; all merges are admissible.
Theorem 15 (CRDT Embedding). For every state-based CRDT (S, ⊔, ≤), there exists a CRDT-
compatible Spherepop reducer whose collapsed semantics are equivalent to the CRDT's convergence
semantics.
Proof. Construct a Spherepop reducer with payload carrier V = S and merge operation ⋄= ⊔.
Let each update be represented as a mapper output whose payload is the updated state. Because
all merges are admissible and collapse is applied eagerly, reducer histories never retain internal
structure. After each merge, the reducer collapses to the canonical join of all received states.
Associativity, commutativity, and idempotence of ⊔guarantee that the resulting payload is
independent of merge order and duplication, matching CRDT convergence semantics.
Remark 8. Under this embedding, Spherepop contributes no additional expressive power. All
event-historical structure is erased immediately, and aggregation reduces to value computation.
19

B.3
Eager Collapse and Event Erasure
CRDT convergence may be characterized as a discipline of mandatory forgetting.
Proposition 11 (Convergence as Eager Collapse). CRDT convergence is equivalent to applying a
collapse operation after every merge that preserves only the payload invariant.
Proof. Since only the join-semilattice value matters for CRDT correctness, all other historical
distinctions are semantically irrelevant. Eager collapse enforces this irrelevance by quotienting
histories immediately.
This observation clariﬁes the philosophical diﬀerence between the two frameworks: CRDTs treat
history as an implementation detail, while Spherepop treats history as semantically primary.
B.4
Non-Embeddability of Refusal
We now establish that the CRDT embedding is strict.
Theorem 16 (Non-Embeddability of Refusal). There exists no faithful embedding of provenance-
guarded Spherepop reducers into CRDT semantics.
Proof. Consider a Spherepop reducer whose merge operation refuses to combine summaries with
overlapping provenance. Suppose, for contradiction, that this reducer could be faithfully embedded
into a CRDT. In CRDT semantics, duplicate updates are either absorbed by idempotence or merged
redundantly without semantic eﬀect.
In Spherepop, by contrast, duplicate provenance renders the merge inadmissible. There exists no
state transition corresponding to refusal: CRDTs cannot distinguish between forbidden composition
and harmless idempotent merge. Therefore no embedding can preserve the refusal semantics.
[Policy Non-Expressibility] Any aggregation policy that forbids certain combinations of inputs
is inexpressible in CRDT semantics.
B.5
Non-Monotone Policies
CRDTs fundamentally rely on monotonic growth of state. Spherepop does not.
Theorem 17 (Non-Monotone Constraints). There exist Spherepop reducers whose admissibility con-
ditions are non-monotone with respect to payload growth, and which therefore cannot be represented
by CRDTs.
Proof. Consider a reducer that refuses merges once provenance size exceeds a ﬁxed threshold,
enforcing a capacity constraint. This refusal depends on accumulated history rather than on
monotonic payload growth. No CRDT state transition can encode such a constraint without
violating convergence.
20

B.6
Summary
CRDTs appear within Spherepop as a special case characterized by eager collapse, absence of
refusal, and exclusive concern with payload convergence. Spherepop strictly generalizes this model
by allowing history to remain meaningful, enforcing policy through inadmissibility, and treating
forgetting as an explicit event rather than an implicit consequence of convergence.
C
Categorical Semantics of Event-Historical Aggregation
This appendix presents a categorical formulation of the event-historical semantics underlying
Spherepop aggregation. The purpose is to make precise the structural claims made in the main text,
namely that aggregation is a form of monoidal composition constrained by authorization, refusal,
and collapse, and that attention mechanisms correspond to traced folds within this structure.
C.1
The Category of Histories
Let H0 be the collection of all admissible event histories. We deﬁne a category H as follows.
Deﬁnition 11 (Objects). Objects of H are equivalence classes of histories under a chosen collapse
equivalence relation ≡I, where I is a ﬁxed set of invariants.
Deﬁnition 12 (Morphisms). Given objects [H] and [H′], a morphism [H] →[H′] exists if and
only if there exists a representative history H′′ ∈[H′] such that H′′ is an authorized extension of a
representative of [H].
Identity morphisms are given by empty extensions. Composition is given by concatenation of
event sequences when authorization permits.
Proposition 12 (Well-Deﬁnedness). Morphisms in H are well deﬁned with respect to the equivalence
relation ≡I.
Proof. If H ≡I H′ and H ⪯K is an authorized extension, then there exists a corresponding
extension H′ ⪯K′ such that K ≡I K′, since collapse preserves admissibility of future events that
depend only on invariants in I.
C.2
Partiality and Refusal
Theorem 18 (Partiality of Composition). H is in general a partial category: composition of
morphisms is not total.
Proof. Authorization constraints depend on full history. There exist morphisms [H] →[H′] and
[H′] →[H′′] such that the corresponding concatenation of events violates authorization. In this
case, no composite morphism exists.
Remark 9. Refusal corresponds categorically to the absence of a morphism, not to a morphism
into a distinguished error object.
21

C.3
Merge as a Partial Monoidal Product
We now show that merge induces a monoidal structure on H.
Deﬁnition 13 (Tensor Product). For objects [H1] and [H2], deﬁne [H1] ⊗[H2] to be the object
represented by the history obtained by merging H1 and H2, if such a merge is authorized. If the
merge is not authorized, the tensor is undeﬁned.
Theorem 19 (Partial Monoidal Structure). (H, ⊗) is a partial monoidal category with unit object
[H∅], the empty reducer history.
Proof. The empty history acts as a unit since merging with it introduces no provenance. Associativity
holds up to collapse by the associativity-up-to-equivalence results proven in Appendix A. Partiality
follows from authorization constraints.
[Symmetry up to Collapse] If merge payload operations are commutative, then H admits a
symmetry isomorphism [H1] ⊗[H2] ∼= [H2] ⊗[H1] up to collapse.
C.4
Collapse as a Quotient Functor
Deﬁnition 14 (Collapse Functor). Let HI denote the category of histories collapsed with respect to
invariants I. The collapse functor
CI : H →HI
maps each object to its equivalence class under ≡I and each morphism to the induced morphism
between equivalence classes.
Theorem 20 (Idempotence and Non-Invertibility). CI is idempotent and non-invertible.
Proof. Idempotence follows because collapsing twice with respect to the same invariants introduces
no further identiﬁcations. Non-invertibility follows because distinct histories may be identiﬁed
under collapse, and no functor can recover the discarded distinctions.
Remark 10. Diﬀerent choices of I yield diﬀerent quotient categories, corresponding to diﬀerent
semantic resolutions.
C.5
Attention as Traced Monoidal Folding
We now formalize attention mechanisms within this categorical setting.
Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph.
For each node i ∈V , let {Hj→i}j∈N(i) be histories
representing mapper outputs from neighbors.
Deﬁnition 15 (Attention Fold). An attention head at node i is a fold
atti :
O
j∈N(i)
[Hj→i] →[Hi]
parameterized by compatibility weights, followed by an optional collapse.
22

Theorem 21 (Attention as Traced Monoidal Operation). Multi-layer attention networks correspond
to traced monoidal structures in H, where residual connections induce trace operators.
Proof. Residual connections feed outputs back as inputs in subsequent layers. In a monoidal
category, such feedback corresponds to a trace. Partiality ensures that only authorized feedback
loops exist.
[Collapse in Standard Transformers] Standard transformer architectures correspond to applying
collapse immediately after each attention fold.
Proof. Transformer implementations retain only the resulting value vectors and discard all interme-
diate relevance structure. This is precisely eager collapse with respect to payload invariants.
C.6
Summary
The categorical semantics developed here unify event-historical aggregation, map-reduce, and
attention mechanisms within a single partial monoidal framework. Merge corresponds to tensoring,
refusal to the absence of morphisms, and collapse to quotienting by invariant-preserving equivalence.
Attention emerges as a traced fold that is ordinarily collapsed in practice, obscuring its underlying
commitment structure.
D
A BNF Grammar for the Spherepop Calculus
This appendix presents a formal grammar for Spherepop, expressed in Backus-Naur Form (BNF).
The grammar deﬁnes the syntactic structure of event-historical programs independently of any
particular execution engine. Its purpose is to make explicit which constructs are primitive and how
histories are formed, extended, and constrained.
The grammar is intentionally minimal. All semantic force arises from event authorization, refusal,
and replay, rather than from complex syntactic forms.
D.1
Lexical Domains
We assume the following disjoint lexical domains:
⟨Identiﬁer⟩
object names, shard IDs, variables
⟨EventName⟩
pop, link, merge, collapse, refuse
⟨Invariant⟩
named invariants (e.g. payload, provenance)
⟨Literal⟩
numbers, symbols, structured values
D.2
Programs and Histories
A Spherepop program is a history speciﬁcation: a sequence of event statements.
⟨Program⟩::= ⟨History⟩
23

⟨History⟩::= ⟨Event⟩
| ⟨History⟩⟨Event⟩
Histories are ordered and append-only. There is no syntactic construct for deletion or mutation
of prior events.
D.3
Events
⟨Event⟩::= ⟨PopEvent⟩
| ⟨LinkEvent⟩
| ⟨MergeEvent⟩
| ⟨CollapseEvent⟩
| ⟨RefuseEvent⟩
Each event form corresponds to a semantic primitive deﬁned in the main text.
D.4
Commitment Events
⟨PopEvent⟩::= pop ⟨Identiﬁer⟩
A pop event introduces an object as a committed fact. The grammar does not enforce autho-
rization; admissibility is a semantic property.
D.5
Provenance and Dependency
⟨LinkEvent⟩::= link ⟨Identiﬁer⟩-> ⟨Identiﬁer⟩
| link ⟨Identiﬁer⟩-> ⟨Identiﬁer⟩: ⟨Identiﬁer⟩
Links encode provenance, causal dependency, typing, or policy constraints. The optional label
reﬁnes the semantic role of the link but does not aﬀect syntax.
D.6
Merge Events
⟨MergeEvent⟩::= merge ⟨Identiﬁer⟩⟨Identiﬁer⟩-> ⟨Identiﬁer⟩
A merge event binds two existing objects into a new object. The target identiﬁer must be fresh.
Authorization depends on provenance and policy rules external to the grammar.
D.7
Controlled Forgetting
⟨CollapseEvent⟩::= collapse ⟨Identiﬁer⟩
| collapse ⟨Identiﬁer⟩keep ⟨InvariantList⟩
⟨InvariantList⟩::= ⟨Invariant⟩
| ⟨Invariant⟩, ⟨InvariantList⟩
24

Collapse events specify which invariants must be preserved. All other distinctions are discarded
irreversibly.
D.8
Refusal
⟨RefuseEvent⟩::= refuse ⟨Event⟩
| refuse ⟨Event⟩: ⟨Identiﬁer⟩
A refusal documents an inadmissible event. Semantically, refusal prevents the existence of any
successor history in which the refused event occurs.
D.9
Values and Literals (Optional Layer)
The core calculus is value-agnostic. When needed, literals may be introduced through external
binding mechanisms:
⟨LiteralBinding⟩::= ⟨Identiﬁer⟩:= ⟨Literal⟩
Such bindings are interpreted as shorthand for constructing objects whose payloads are given by
the literal values. They do not alter the event semantics.
D.10
Well-Formedness Conditions (Informal)
The grammar permits syntactically valid but semantically inadmissible programs. The following
conditions are enforced semantically rather than grammatically:
• An identiﬁer must be introduced by pop before it can be merged.
• Merge targets must be fresh identiﬁers.
• Authorization constraints determine whether merges and collapses are admissible.
• Refusal prevents the existence of extended histories.
These constraints are intentionally excluded from the grammar to preserve a clean separation
between syntax and event-historical semantics.
D.11
Discussion
This grammar emphasizes that Spherepop is not a term-rewriting language but a history-construction
calculus. Programs specify not how values are transformed, but which events are attempted and
which commitments are made or refused. Execution is replay, and correctness is admissibility.
The simplicity of the grammar reﬂects a design principle: expressive power should reside in
event semantics and authorization, not in syntactic complexity.
25

E
Small-Step Operational Semantics
This appendix derives a small-step operational semantics for Spherepop directly from the core event
grammar. The semantics is intentionally minimal: it deﬁnes how histories are extended one event at
a time, how refusal corresponds to stuckness (absence of a successor conﬁguration), and how replay
materializes objects as persistent artifacts.
E.1
Conﬁgurations
We model execution as a transition system over conﬁgurations. A conﬁguration is a triple
⟨H, Γ, Σ⟩,
where H is the committed event history, Γ is an object environment, and Σ is a semantic store. The
environment Γ maps identiﬁers to object references; the store Σ maps object references to semantic
records. A semantic record minimally contains a payload component and a provenance component,
but the semantics is parameterized by the payload algebra.
Deﬁnition 16 (Semantic Record). A semantic record is a pair Σ(o) = (v(o), P(o)) where v(o) is
the payload and P(o) ⊆S is a ﬁnite provenance set.
The semantics assumes a partial payload merge operator ⋄on payloads and a partial authorization
predicate Auth that may depend on H, Γ and Σ.
E.2
Judgments
We write a small step as
⟨H, Γ, Σ⟩e−→⟨H′, Γ′, Σ′⟩,
meaning that event e is admissible and produces a successor conﬁguration. If no successor exists,
the conﬁguration is stuck; refusal is represented by non-existence of a step.
We will also use a helper judgment for freshness: fresh(x, Γ) holds when identiﬁer x is not bound
in Γ.
E.3
Rules for pop
A pop introduces a new committed object name. Operationally, it allocates a fresh object reference
o and binds it to the identiﬁer. The payload and provenance of a pop may be supplied externally
(e.g. via literal binding) or may default to a unit value.
Proposition 13 (Pop Rule). If fresh(x, Γ) and Auth(H, Γ, Σ, pop x) then there exists a fresh object
reference o such that
⟨H, Γ, Σ⟩pop x
−−−−→⟨H · pop(x), Γ[x 7→o], Σ[o 7→(v0, P0)]⟩.
Remark 11. The choice of (v0, P0) is parameterized. For mapper outputs, (v0, P0) will already
encode the shard provenance; for empty reducers, P0 = ∅.
26

E.4
Rules for link
Links do not change payloads; they register dependency structure. The semantics may record links
as part of the store, or treat them as history-only. We present a conservative semantics that records
them in Σ as adjacency metadata Links(o).
Proposition 14 (Link Rule). If Γ(x) = ox, Γ(y) = oy, and Auth(H, Γ, Σ, link x →y) then
⟨H, Γ, Σ⟩
link x→y
−−−−−−→⟨H · link(x →y), Γ, Σ′⟩
where Σ′ is Σ updated so that ox records a link to oy.
E.5
Rules for merge
Merge is the only primitive that necessarily changes payload and provenance. It constructs a fresh
target object whose semantic record is computed from the sources. Authorization includes (at
minimum) provenance disjointness and may include policy.
Let x, y, z be identiﬁers. Deﬁne ox = Γ(x), oy = Γ(y), and assume z is fresh. Let Σ(ox) = (vx, Px)
and Σ(oy) = (vy, Py).
Theorem 22 (Merge Rule). If fresh(z, Γ), Px ∩Py = ∅, the payload merge vx ⋄vy is deﬁned, and
Auth(H, Γ, Σ, merge x y →z), then there exists a fresh object reference oz such that
⟨H, Γ, Σ⟩
merge x y→z
−−−−−−−−−→⟨H · merge(x, y →z), Γ[z 7→oz], Σ′⟩
where Σ′(oz) = (vx ⋄vy, Px ∪Py) and Σ′ also records links from oz to ox and oy.
Proof. By the stated conditions, the semantic record for the merged object is deﬁned. Freshness
ensures a new identity. Recording ancestry links is admissible and preserves lineage.
E.6
Rules for collapse
Collapse replaces an object by a collapsed representative that preserves a chosen set of invariants.
Operationally, collapse may either produce a new object name or rewrite the semantic record of an
existing object reference. To preserve the append-only character, we adopt a persistent semantics:
collapse allocates a new object reference o′ and rebinds the identiﬁer to it.
Let KeepI denote an invariant projection operator, mapping semantic records to a canonical
representative preserving invariants I.
Theorem 23 (Collapse Rule). If Γ(x) = o, Auth(H, Γ, Σ, collapse x keep I), and KeepI(Σ(o))
is deﬁned, then there exists a fresh object reference o′ such that
⟨H, Γ, Σ⟩
collapse x keep I
−−−−−−−−−−−−→⟨H · collapse(x; I), Γ[x 7→o′], Σ[o′ 7→KeepI(Σ(o))]⟩.
27

E.7
Rules for refuse
A refuse statement is documentation of inadmissibility. Operationally, it does not advance the
computation, because it asserts that a particular event has no admissible successor. We therefore
treat it as a judgmental annotation, not a transition.
Deﬁnition 17 (Refusal and Stuckness). A conﬁguration is stuck on event e if there is no conﬁgu-
ration C′ such that C
e−→C′. A refuse statement is well formed exactly when its embedded event
would be stuck at the current conﬁguration.
Remark 12. This matches the essay's semantics: refusal is absence of a continuation, not an error
value.
F
A Static Type and Authorization System
This appendix gives a static discipline that approximates the dynamic authorization predicate Auth
and prevents large classes of inadmissible histories from being written. The intent is not to decide
authorization completely, but to separate (i) syntactic well-formedness, (ii) static admissibility, and
(iii) dynamic policy checks.
F.1
Typing Environments and Types
We deﬁne a typing environment ∆mapping identiﬁers to types. Types track at least two aspects:
the payload kind and the provenance footprint.
Let κ range over payload kinds (e.g. histogram, sum, set, embedding).
Let π range over
provenance descriptors. For static checking, provenance may be approximated as either a concrete
ﬁnite set (when known) or an abstract region label.
Deﬁnition 18 (Types). A Spherepop object type is a pair τ = κ[π], where κ is a payload kind and
π is a provenance descriptor.
We write disjoint(π1, π2) for a decidable predicate that conservatively approximates disjointness
of provenance. If it returns true, dynamic provenance disjointness is guaranteed; if false, disjointness
is unknown and must be decided dynamically or refused conservatively.
F.2
Typing Judgments
Typing judgments have the form
∆⊢e : ∆′,
meaning that under environment ∆, event e is statically admissible and produces an updated
environment ∆′.
28

F.3
Rules
Theorem 24 (Pop Typing). If x /∈dom(∆) and τ is an assigned type for x, then
∆⊢pop x : ∆[x 7→τ].
Remark 13. The grammar does not assign τ; a front-end may infer it from literal bindings or
annotations, or leave it abstract.
Theorem 25 (Link Typing). If ∆(x) = τx and ∆(y) = τy, then
∆⊢link x →y : ∆.
Theorem 26 (Merge Typing). If ∆(x) = κ[πx], ∆(y) = κ[πy], z /∈dom(∆), and disjoint(πx, πy)
holds, then
∆⊢merge x y →z : ∆[z 7→κ[πx ∪πy]].
Proof. Static disjointness ensures the dynamic disjointness precondition. Payload kinds must match
to ensure that ⋄is deﬁned at the kind level. Provenance union is tracked in the resulting type.
Theorem 27 (Collapse Typing). If ∆(x) = κ[π] and I is an invariant set admissible for κ, then
∆⊢collapse x keep I : ∆.
Remark 14. Collapse does not change the kind, but it may coarsen provenance. A reﬁned system
may update π to a less precise descriptor to reﬂect forgetting.
F.4
Soundness Relative to Dynamic Authorization
Let Auth include at least (i) kind compatibility, (ii) provenance disjointness, and (iii) any additional
policy constraints.
Theorem 28 (Static Soundness). If ∆⊢e : ∆′ and the runtime conﬁguration realizes ∆, then
either e is dynamically authorized or it is rejected only due to policy constraints not expressible in ∆.
Proof. The typing rules enforce the structural preconditions of authorization: freshness, kind
compatibility, and (conservative) provenance disjointness. Any remaining rejections must therefore
arise from constraints intentionally left to dynamic policy.
G
A Reference Interpreter Consistent with the Grammar
This appendix speciﬁes a minimal reference interpreter that executes Spherepop programs by
replaying their event histories under the small-step semantics. The interpreter is described as an
algorithm rather than an implementation, so that multiple concrete runtimes can be validated
against the same reference behavior.
29

G.1
Interpreter State
The interpreter maintains a state (H, Γ, Σ) as in Appendix E, together with an allocation counter
for fresh object references.
The interpreter takes as input a parsed program, i.e. a sequence of event statements (e1, . . . , en).
G.2
Execution Algorithm
Execution proceeds sequentially. For each event ei, the interpreter checks static admissibility
(optional), then checks dynamic authorization, then applies the corresponding transition rule. If no
transition rule applies, the interpreter halts and reports refusal (inadmissibility) with an explanation
when available.
Algorithm Replay(program):
initialize H := empty
initialize ÎŞ := empty
initialize Îč := empty
for each event e in program:
if optional_static_check_enabled:
require ÎŤ âŁć e : ÎŤ'
(else reject)
if no small-step rule applies to â§ĺH,ÎŞ,Îčâ§ľ with label e:
report REFUSAL(e, H, ÎŞ, Îč)
halt
else:
apply the unique rule to obtain â§ĺH',ÎŞ',Îč'â§ľ
set (H,ÎŞ,Îč) := (H',ÎŞ',Îč')
return â§ĺH,ÎŞ,Îčâ§ľ
G.3
Determinism
Determinism holds when allocation is deterministic (e.g. fresh references chosen by a counter) and
when payload merge ⋄is deterministic.
Theorem 29 (Determinism of Replay). Assume deterministic allocation and deterministic payload
operations. Then for any program, replay produces either a unique ﬁnal conﬁguration or a unique
ﬁrst refusal event.
Proof. By construction, each event statement has at most one applicable transition rule given the
current conﬁguration. If no rule applies, refusal is determined at that point. Otherwise the successor
is uniquely determined.
G.4
Conformance Criteria
A concrete implementation conforms to this reference interpreter if, for every program, it agrees on
(i) the ﬁrst point of refusal, when refusal occurs, and (ii) the ﬁnal replayed semantic records for all
committed identiﬁers, modulo the chosen collapse invariants.
30

Deﬁnition 19 (Interpreter Conformance). An implementation conforms if for all programs P,
either both reference and implementation refuse at the same event index, or both terminate with
equivalent stores under invariant-preserving equivalence.
References
[1] L. Lamport. Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed system. Communications
of the ACM, 21(7):558-565, 1978.
[2] J. Gray and A. Reuter. Transaction Processing: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann,
1993.
[3] M. Fowler. Event sourcing. martinfowler.com, 2005. Online essay.
[4] M. Shapiro, N. PreguiÃğa, C. Baquero, and M. Zawirski. Conﬂict-free replicated data types.
In Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium on Stabilization, Safety, and Security of
Distributed Systems (SSS), 2011.
[5] C. Baquero, P. SÃľrgio Almeida, and A. Shoker. Making operation-based CRDTs operation-
based. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems
(OPODIS), 2017.
[6] N. A. Lynch. Distributed Algorithms. Morgan Kaufmann, 1996.
[7] J.-Y. Girard. Linear logic. Theoretical Computer Science, 50(1):1-102, 1987.
[8] S. Abramsky and B. Coecke. A categorical semantics of quantum protocols. In Proceedings of
the 19th IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), 2004.
[9] A. Joyal, R. Street, and D. Verity. Traced monoidal categories. Mathematical Proceedings of
the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 119(3):447-468, 1996.
[10] P. Selinger. A survey of graphical languages for monoidal categories. In New Structures for
Physics, Springer, 2011.
[11] C. H. Bennett. The thermodynamics of computationâĂŤA review. International Journal of
Theoretical Physics, 21(12):905-940, 1982.
[12] R. Landauer. Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing process. IBM Journal of
Research and Development, 5(3):183-191, 1961.
[13] S. Mac Lane. Categories for the Working Mathematician. Springer, 2nd edition, 1998.
[14] J. Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition,
2009.
[15] A. Vaswani et al. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
31

[16] P. Battaglia et al.
Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks.
arXiv:1806.01261, 2018.
[17] M. M. Bronstein et al. Geometric deep learning: Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges.
arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.
[18] J. A. Barandes. Unistochastic quantum theory. Physical Review A, 108(3), 2023.
[19] K. Friston. The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
11:127-138, 2010.
[20] G. Dodig-Crnkovic. Information, computation, cognition. Entropy, 16(1):245-256, 2014.
[21] G. Winskel. Event structures. In Advances in Petri Nets, Springer, 1987.
[22] R. Milner. Communication and Concurrency. Prentice Hall, 1989.
[23] C. Hewitt. A universal modular actor formalism for artiﬁcial intelligence. In Proceedings of
IJCAI, 1973.
32

