Globally Persistent Recomposable Thought
GitHub, the Intelligence Explosion, and
the Admissibility Geometry of Collective Cognition
Flyxion
May 14, 2026
Abstract
The conventional narrative attributes the current acceleration in technological capability
to the emergence of generative artificial intelligence. This essay argues that this attribution
is substantially mislocated. The more fundamental cause is a structural transformation in the
organization of human technical cognition that preceded large language models by nearly
two decades: the creation, through GitHub and adjacent open-source infrastructure, of a
globally persistent, recursively recomposable substrate for executable thought. Generative AI
functions as a compression interface and navigational accelerant over that substrate, not as its
source. We develop this argument in five stages: first, as a historical and infrastructural claim
about the bottlenecks that GitHub dissolved; second, as an epistemic economy argument
about the incentive structures GitHub created across academia, industry, and independent
research; third, through a concrete worked example in which Spherepop semantics are im-
plemented over the probabilistic substrate language /æmbiːɛf/, demonstrating the three-tier
taxonomy of admissible, boundary, and inert repository contributions; fourth, as a connection
to the Quantum SpherePop field-theoretic framework, in which developmental geometry
is interpreted as a semantic quantization sequence and repository replay is formalized as
coarse-grained semantic reconstruction; and fifth, as a connection to the RSVP admissibility
framework, in which the GitHub substrate is understood as a planetary-scale coherence field
whose dynamics are governed by the same lamphron-lamphrodyne duality that governs
physical structure formation. Mathematical appendices formalize the stochastic tape geome-
try, bubble energy, mortality functional, stabilization operators, and attractor semantics of
the worked example.
1

Contents
1
Introduction: Locating the Explosion
3
2
What GitHub Changed Structurally
4
3
Toward a Theory of Procedural Substrates
6
4
The Epistemic Economy: Academia, Industry, and the Incentive Inversion
8
5
The Recursion That Closed
10
6
Why Esolangs Matter Epistemically
12
7
A Worked Example
13
8
Bubbles as Metastable Attractors: The Spherepop Layer
16
9
The Three Tiers of Admissibility
20
10 Commit Histories as Temporal Geometry
22
11 What Generative Algorithms Learn
24
12 Gradient Legibility and the LLM as Manifold-Compression Operator
25
13 Developmental Geometry Across Representational Layers
27
14 Quantum SpherePop and Semantic Quantization
28
15 Replay as Coarse-Grained Semantic Reconstruction
30
16 Phase Synchronization and the Collective Procedural Field
31
17 RSVP Connections: GitHub as Planetary Admissibility Geometry
32
18 Objections and Clarifications
35
19 Conclusion: Thought as Recursively Reusable Infrastructure
37
Notation Glossary
38
A Probabilistic Tape Geometry
40
2

B
Bubble Regions
40
C Bubble Energy and Coherence
40
D Mortality Functional
41
E
Stabilization Operators
41
F
Merge Dynamics
42
G Semantic Replay
42
H Attractor Semantics
42
I
Spherepop-/æmbiːɛf/ Correspondence
43
3

1
Introduction: Locating the Explosion
When observers describe an intelligence explosion in progress, they typically point at the visible
outputs of large language models: the apparent fluency, the breadth of domain competence, the
speed of generation. The inference drawn is that something qualitatively new has appeared
inside the models themselves. This essay disputes that inference — not in order to diminish what
generative AI accomplishes, but in order to locate the causal structure of the acceleration more
precisely.
The acceleration has at least two distinct components. One is the improvement in pattern
synthesis achieved by scaling transformer architectures over massive corpora. The other, older,
and arguably more fundamental component is the creation of a globally persistent, recomposable,
machine-readable substrate of executable human cognition. That substrate did not arrive with
GPT. It arrived with Git and GitHub, and it matured over a decade before foundation models
became publicly visible.
To conflate these two components — to attribute the explosion to the synthesis engine while
ignoring the substrate it synthesizes over — is to mistake the accelerant for the fuel. The fuel
is the open-source graph. GitHub operationalized globally recomposable thought years before
any language model was capable of navigating it fluently. What generative AI contributed was a
compression interface: a mechanism for making the accumulated graph more navigable, more
searchable, more autocomplete-able. The graph itself was already there.
Underlying this argument is an implicit redefinition of intelligence that the essay will make
progressively more explicit. Intelligence is not merely inference efficiency within an isolated
agent [17]. It is the persistence, replayability, and recomposability of developmental trajectories
across a collective substrate. GitHub is intelligent infrastructure not because it reasons, but
because it preserves and recombines the intermediate cognitive states of millions of contributors
in a form that remains recoverable, extensible, and semantically legible across time. Generative
AI is impressive because it navigates that infrastructure fluently — but the infrastructure is the
prior achievement.
A Formal Distinction
Let G denote the open-source repository graph at time t, with nodes Ri (repositories) and directed
edges representing dependency or derivation relations. Let Mt denote a language model trained
on the corpus induced by Gt. The standard narrative implicitly models capability as a function of
model parameters alone:
capability(t) ≈f(Mt).
4

The thesis of this essay is that this factorization is incorrect. The correct model is:
capability(t) ≈f(Mt, Gt),
where Gt is not merely training data but the admissibility geometry over which Mt operates.
Holding Gt fixed at its pre-2005 state while scaling Mt to current parameter counts would produce
a system of dramatically lower practical capability, because the substrate carrying executable
procedural knowledge would be absent. The explosion is located in the joint growth of both
terms, not in Mt alone.
2
What GitHub Changed Structurally
Before distributed version control became socially normalized through GitHub, programming
knowledge was fragmented across institutional silos, mailing list archives, FTP mirrors, academic
preprints, and private internal repositories. Code reuse existed, but composability was expensive
in a deep sense: discovering compatible dependencies, understanding undocumented build
assumptions, patching incompatibilities across codebases, and maintaining local forks all imposed
friction costs that compounded at every layer of abstraction. Knowledge transfer was slow, lossy,
and structurally conservative — it favored large institutions with internal memory over distributed
coordination.
Git itself introduced distributed version control [7, 21], but GitHub introduced something
architecturally distinct: it transformed repositories into globally addressable semantic modules. A
repository ceased to be mere storage and became instead a live executable idea, carrying versioned
history, public forking infrastructure, discoverable architecture, compositional dependency graphs,
executable documentation, collaborative debugging, social reputation mechanisms, and machine-
readable structural metadata simultaneously.
This matters because intelligence amplification in any system — biological, institutional, or
technological — tends to come less from increases in raw processing capacity than from reductions
in the friction of recombination [19, 24]. The critical resource is not the power of individual nodes
but the composability of the graph they inhabit [1].
GitHub made software development into a partially continuous evolutionary system. A single
developer anywhere on the planet can improve a tokenizer originally written in another country,
which optimizes a training pipeline maintained in a third, which accelerates a robotics stack
assembled in a fourth, which gets incorporated into a model deployed globally within days. The
causal chain crosses borders, institutions, and time zones with a friction cost that would have been
prohibitive under any previous coordination infrastructure. This is historically unprecedented
not in degree but in kind.
5

The entire modern AI ecosystem is downstream of this recombination layer. The libraries, the
training frameworks, the evaluation harnesses, the inference runtimes, the quantization methods,
the adapter architectures, the diffusion pipelines and deployment toolchains — none of these
emerged from isolated laboratories operating independently. They emerged from an ultra-dense
recursive open-source ecosystem whose coordination was primarily mediated through GitHub. A
modern foundation model is not a singular invention. It is an enormous stitched-together graph
of repositories, and its apparent intelligence is partially the intelligence of that graph made fluid.
In this sense GitHub functions as a planetary externalized cortex. Repositories are memory
units. Forks are evolutionary branches. Pull requests are reconciliation operators that integrate
divergent solutions. Issue trackers are error-correction loops. Stars and watchers are salience
signals that route collective attention. Continuous integration pipelines are automated verification
mechanisms that prevent the silent accumulation of errors. The architecture recapitulates, at
planetary scale, many of the structural features of biological working memory — but with the
crucial addition of perfect reproducibility, zero marginal copy cost, and global simultaneous
accessibility.
Composability as a Monotone Functional
Define the recombination friction ρ(Ri, Rj) between two repositories Ri, Rj ∈G as the ex-
pected developer effort required to integrate Rj into a codebase that already depends on Ri.
Before GitHub, ρ was high and asymmetric: it depended strongly on institutional access, version
availability, and documentation quality. GitHub reduced ρ toward a near-constant baseline by
standardizing dependency declaration, forking, and issue resolution as first-class operations.
Proposition 2.1 (Composability Monotonicity). Let Gt be the repository graph at time t with mean
pairwise recombination friction ¯ρt. If GitHub's structural innovations reduce ¯ρt monotonically, then
the number of reachable composite systems of depth d grows at least exponentially in d as ¯ρt →0.
Proof sketch. A composite system of depth d requires d successful integration steps. The proba-
bility that each step succeeds is approximately 1 −¯ρt/C for some cost constant C. The expected
number of reachable composites at depth d is therefore (1 −¯ρt/C)d · |Gt|d. As ¯ρt →0 this
approaches |Gt|d, which grows exponentially in d for any fixed graph size exceeding one.
Corollary 2.2. Even a modest reduction in ¯ρt produces superlinear growth in the accessible com-
posite design space. GitHub's reduction was not modest; it was structural. The consequence is the
combinatorial explosion in deployable AI infrastructure observed over the past fifteen years.
6

3
Toward a Theory of Procedural Substrates
The preceding section described what GitHub changed infrastructurally. Before proceeding to
the incentive economy and the worked example, we need to establish what kind of object a
repository actually is within the framework this paper develops. The vocabulary introduced here
— developmental trajectory, recomposability, semantic replay, procedural substrate — will govern
all subsequent analysis, and its stabilization early prevents ambiguity from accumulating across
later sections.
Artifacts versus trajectories.
The conventional view of a software repository treats it as
an information object: a collection of files encoding a program. On this view, two repositories
with identical file contents are identical repositories, and the history of how those contents were
produced is archival metadata rather than constitutive structure. This paper rejects that view.
A repository is not primarily an artifact. It is a compressed developmental history — a record
of a trajectory through semantic configuration space — from which the artifact is merely the most
recent projection. The distinction is not merely philosophical. It determines what can be recovered
from the repository, what can be extended from it, and what training signal it contributes to a
language model. Formally:
artifact(R) ̸= trajectory(R).
The artifact is the current state xn. The trajectory is the sequence (x0, x1, . . . , xn) of states con-
nected by the commit history. GitHub preserves partial access to the trajectory; older publication
systems preserved only the artifact.
Recomposability as a geometric property.
Recomposability is sometimes understood as a
social property (whether contributors are willing to share code) or as an infrastructural property
(whether package managers support integration). This paper uses a stricter definition.
Definition 3.1 (Recomposability). A repository R is recomposable with respect to a target archi-
tecture τ if there exists a fork R′ of R such that:
1. R′ satisfies the structural requirements of τ,
2. the developmental trace of R′ is recoverable from that of R plus a bounded number of additional
commits, and
3. the admissibility score A(R′) ≥A(R) −ε for some tolerance ε > 0.
Under this definition, recomposability is a geometric property of the repository's position
in configuration space: it asks whether τ is reachable from R via a bounded-cost trajectory
7

that remains inside the admissible region {Φ > 0}. A repository may be technically open-
source but geometrically irrecomposable if its architecture is so idiosyncratic that no bounded
extension reaches a useful target. Conversely, a well-designed modular repository may be highly
recomposable even with non-trivial licensing constraints, because its extension surfaces are
clearly defined and its dependencies are minimal.
Semantic replay.
Replay is the operation by which a repository's developmental geometry
is re-instantiated in a new context. A fork is a replay operation: it takes the developmental
trace of R and re-executes it under altered initial conditions (a different base version, a different
dependency set, a different target platform). The crucial property of replay is that it need not
produce an identical result to the original: what it must produce is a result that lies in the same
attractor basin — a system that satisfies the same semantic invariants as the original, reached by
a developmentally continuous path.
This distinguishes replay from copying. Copying produces an identical artifact. Replay
produces a semantically equivalent trajectory endpoint, potentially via a different route. GitHub's
fork infrastructure implements replay; its snapshot downloads implement copying. The two
are not equivalent as training signals: a corpus of copies provides no developmental geometry;
a corpus of forks and their parent repositories exposes the trajectory structure that makes
generalization possible.
Procedural substrates.
We are now in a position to define the central concept of the paper.
Definition 3.2 (Procedural Substrate). A procedural substrate is a globally accessible, version-
controlled repository graph G in which:
1. developmental trajectories are partially preserved (repositories have public commit histories
recoverable by any agent with network access),
2. recomposability is structurally supported (dependency declaration, forking, and merge opera-
tions are first-class graph operations), and
3. intermediate cognitive states are externalized (issue discussions, branch histories, and commit
messages preserve reasoning traces alongside code changes).
The admissibility density of a procedural substrate is A(G) = ER∼G[A(R)].
The thesis of this paper can now be stated precisely: the current intelligence explosion is
explained by the emergence of GitHub as the first planetary-scale procedural substrate, and the
role of generative AI is to function as a manifold-compression operator (defined formally in §12)
over that substrate. Scale of compute amplifies the signal the substrate provides; it does not
substitute for the substrate itself.
8

Intermediate cognitive states.
The third condition in Definition 3.2 deserves emphasis be-
cause it represents the sharpest departure from prior publication systems. Previous civilizations
preserved finalized artifacts: published papers, finished products, polished monographs. GitHub
preserves intermediate procedural cognition: the reasoning, the failure modes, the alternatives
considered, the implementation choices made and abandoned, the debugging traces, the partial
implementations, and the evolutionary trajectory from naive first attempt to refined architecture.
This matters because intermediate states carry the developmental geometry that final states
conceal. A published paper explaining an algorithm does not expose the five failed implemen-
tations that preceded it, the bug that forced a redesign, or the off-by-one error that revealed
a deeper architectural assumption. A public repository with its full commit history does. The
training signal embedded in that history is qualitatively different from the training signal in the
final published artifact: it exposes not only what the system is but how it became what it is,
which is precisely the developmental geometry that enables both human extension and model
generalization.
4
The Epistemic Economy: Academia, Industry, and the Incentive
Inversion
The structural argument becomes considerably stronger when one examines what GitHub did
simultaneously to academia and to industry — and in particular the strange new incentive
landscape it created across both.
Traditional academic knowledge production was optimized around scarcity. Journal slots were
scarce. Institutional legitimacy was scarce. Peer review was slow and systematically selected for
finished narratives, clean positive outcomes, and retrospective theoretical coherence. The payoff
structure strongly discouraged publishing negative results, failed experiments, intermediate
implementations, and unfinished tooling. Much of the productive cognitive work behind a
published result disappeared permanently into private hard drives and unpublished notes.
Industry was similarly siloed. Tooling was proprietary, research pipelines were closed, en-
gineering cultures were isolated, and the primary mechanism for knowledge transfer across
institutions was credential-mediated hiring rather than artifact-mediated accumulation.
GitHub partially inverted both systems simultaneously.
For researchers, a public repository became a mechanism for reproducibility and a new form
of epistemic credibility. A paper without accompanying code has come to look increasingly incom-
plete in any field where results depend on exact preprocessing pipelines, training configurations,
dependency version constraints, hidden implementation choices, and evaluation harnesses that
are not fully specifiable in prose. The repository functions as an executable appendix: not merely
9

supplementary material, but primary evidence. The claim shifts from the assertion of a result to
the demonstration of the exact machinery that generated it. This is a profound epistemological
change, because it substantially narrows the gap between claim and verifiable warrant.
More unexpectedly, GitHub rewards incompleteness in ways that the traditional academic
publication system strongly punished. A half-working repository can generate enormous down-
stream value if someone else forks it, repairs a critical bug, integrates it with another project,
reinterprets its architecture, or extracts a single useful subroutine that would otherwise have
remained invisible. A failed transformer experiment may contain a novel architectural idea. An
abandoned rendering engine may contain a useful data structure. An incomplete theorem prover
may implement a technique that another researcher needs. Under the old system, all of this would
have vanished. GitHub externalizes cognitive debris instead of discarding it, and evolutionary
systems require variation — including failed variation — not merely success. This transforms
failure itself into reusable infrastructure, which is a genuinely novel property of the ecosystem
GitHub produced.
Businesses reinforce this dynamic because repositories also became the highest-bandwidth
talent discovery mechanism available [3, 16]. A repository is substantially more informative than
a résumé. Code quality, architectural taste, debugging persistence, documentation discipline,
collaboration behavior, design philosophy, and the trajectory of intellectual growth over time
are all directly visible in a sufficiently active public profile. This creates a strange new incentive
structure: people publish not only because publication is epistemically virtuous but because
publication is economically actionable. The repository is simultaneously a research artifact, a
portfolio, a social signal, a collaboration node, a recruiting surface, and a contribution to the
commons. All of these payoffs align toward the same behavior: public technical disclosure.
Even large corporations participate in this economy because selective open sourcing can attract
talent, establish de facto standards, shape downstream ecosystems, reduce internal maintenance
costs, appropriate community labor, and increase platform lock-in. The incentive structures
across academic researchers, independent hobbyists, early-stage startups, and large technology
corporations are therefore partially aligned toward an outcome — global public technical disclosure
— that no centralized actor planned and no traditional institution could have organized.
That alignment is historically unusual. In previous eras, academics hoarded unfinished
work, corporations concealed infrastructure, hobbyists lacked visibility, and failed ideas vanished.
GitHub changed the payoff matrix at every level of the ecosystem simultaneously, and the result
was an unprecedented externalization of procedural knowledge into globally accessible executable
form.
10

The Payoff Matrix Inversion
Let Vpub(R) denote the private value to a developer of publishing repository R, and Vpriv(R)
the value of keeping it private. Under the pre-GitHub regime, Vpriv(R) > Vpub(R) for most R:
secrecy preserved competitive advantage, and publication infrastructure was costly. GitHub
altered the components of Vpub by adding reputation signals σ(R), talent-market visibility τ(R),
and community maintenance value µ(R):
Vpub(R) = V0(R) + σ(R) + τ(R) + µ(R),
where V0(R) is the baseline epistemic value of the artifact and σ, τ, µ ≥0. For repositories of
sufficiently broad utility, σ + τ + µ dominates any competitive-secrecy premium, reversing the
inequality. The result is a Nash equilibrium shift: once enough participants publish, the reputa-
tional penalty for not publishing exceeds the competitive benefit of secrecy, making publication
the dominant strategy across the ecosystem.
Proposition 4.1 (Publication Dominance). In a market where talent acquisition depends on public
repository visibility and where standard-setting requires ecosystem adoption, there exists a threshold
θ > 0 such that for any repository with aggregate utility exceeding θ, publication is the dominant
strategy regardless of initial competitive considerations.
This threshold is endogenous: as more participants publish, τ(R) increases for all repositories
(because the talent market becomes more repository-literate) and σ(R) increases (because visibil-
ity scales with network density), lowering θ further. The equilibrium is therefore self-reinforcing
once critical mass is reached.
5
The Recursion That Closed
The current acceleration is therefore the product of a closed recursion loop rather than a single
technological breakthrough. GitHub accumulated global executable cognition over roughly a
decade and a half. Large language models trained on that cognition. Those models now assist in
generating new repositories. Those repositories feed future training corpora. The cycle accelerates.
The explosion is not located inside the model alone. It is located in the coupling between
globally persistent open-source infrastructure, distributed version control, internet-scale collabo-
rative coordination, and machine-assisted synthesis. Remove any of these components and the
feedback loop either slows dramatically or ceases.
One useful formulation distinguishes the memory layer from the synthesis layer. GitHub
created civilization-scale working memory: a globally accessible, perfectly reproducible, continu-
ously updated record of executable technical cognition accumulated across millions of contributors
11

over years. Generative AI created civilization-scale autocomplete over that memory: a mech-
anism for navigating, compressing, translating, and recombining the contents of that record
with substantially reduced friction. The autocomplete is impressive. But it autocompletes over a
substrate it did not create.
An LLM trained exclusively on text that predated the open-source ecosystem would be
dramatically weaker in practical utility, because the open-source ecosystem is not merely training
data — it is the ontological substrate from which the model's representations of procedural
reasoning are derived. GitHub may not merely have enabled AI. It may have manufactured the
very conceptual vocabulary that AI learned to navigate.
The deeper bottleneck that was dissolved was never insufficient raw intelligence. It was
insufficient coordination, reuse, interoperability, discoverability, and cumulative persistence of
technical cognition across institutional and national boundaries. GitHub solved that bottleneck
first. Generative AI subsequently accelerated throughput over a substrate that had already been
built.
Fixed-Point Analysis of the Recursion
Let Gt denote the repository graph and Mt a language model at time t. Define the joint state
Σt = (Gt, Mt). The recursion operates through two coupled update rules:
Mt+1 = Train(Mt, Gt),
(1)
Gt+1 = Extend(Gt, Mt),
(2)
where Train updates model parameters from the current graph corpus and Extend adds reposito-
ries generated or assisted by the current model. The composition Φ = Extend ◦Train defines a
dynamical system on the joint space.
Proposition 5.1 (Recursion Amplification). If Train is monotone in graph quality (better-structured
graphs produce more capable models) and Extend is monotone in model capability (more capable
models generate higher-quality repositories), then the joint dynamical system is monotone increasing
in both coordinates simultaneously, and no stable fixed point exists below the resource ceiling of the
ecosystem.
Proof sketch. Let q(G) denote graph quality and c(M) model capability, both real-valued. By
assumption c(Mt+1) ≥c(Mt) whenever q(Gt) ≥q(Gt−1), and q(Gt+1) ≥q(Gt) whenever
c(Mt) ≥c(Mt−1). By induction on t, both sequences are non-decreasing. A fixed point Σ∗
would require Train(M∗, G∗) = M∗and Extend(G∗, M∗) = G∗simultaneously, which cannot
hold below the resource ceiling because each update strictly improves upon the previous state.
12

Corollary 5.2. The feedback loop described in equations (1) and (2) is self-accelerating. The observed
nonlinearity in AI capability growth is not a property of the model architecture alone; it is a property
of the coupled dynamical system.
6
Why Esolangs Matter Epistemically
Before presenting the worked example, it is worth explaining why an esoteric programming
language — rather than a more conventional computational model — provides the most instructive
substrate for the argument. The choice is not arbitrary or ornamental. Esolangs function as
compressed laboratories for admissibility geometry because they isolate computational invariants
under adversarial conditions.
A conventional programming language is designed to minimize friction between programmer
intent and machine execution. It supplies deterministic control flow, precise arithmetic, predictable
memory, and a type system that enforces consistency at the symbolic level. These features are
engineered precisely to eliminate the gap between syntactic intent and operational behavior. This
makes conventional languages excellent tools for building systems, but poor instruments for
studying the minimal conditions under which computation survives substrate unreliability.
An esoteric language designed adversarially — one that deliberately removes the scaffolding
that conventional languages supply — forces exactly this question into the open: what is the
irreducible structural minimum that permits coherent computation? The answer reveals which
invariants are genuinely load-bearing and which are engineering conveniences.
/æmbiːɛf/ is particularly well suited to this purpose because it removes directional determin-
ism: the most basic assumption of Turing-complete computation, namely that symbolic control
flow determines operational behavior, is destroyed at the syntactic level. The programmer can
write + or -, < or >, but the runtime erases the distinction. What survives is only what the
substrate cannot destroy: in this case, parity.
Symbolic determinism versus statistical semantic persistence.
This establishes the central
epistemological distinction that bridges the worked example to the larger GitHub argument.
Ordinary programming languages stabilize computation through symbolic determinism: the
semantics of a program are fully determined by its text, and execution is a pure function of
the symbolic state. Spherepop-style systems stabilize computation through statistical semantic
persistence: meaning is not encoded in any single symbolic state but in the distribution of states
that a system reliably occupies under perturbation. A bubble is not a variable whose value is the
current tape cell content; it is a localized probability distribution whose center of mass defines
the semantic state.
This distinction is not merely technical. It is the bridge between:
13

• the GitHub replay argument (repository identity is defined not by a snapshot but by
the distribution of states a development process reliably returns to under forking and
perturbation),
• the stochastic semantics of /æmbiːɛf/ and Spherepop (meaning persists through attractor
stability rather than symbolic identity),
• the LLM training argument (models learn developmental geometry — the attractor structure
of good code — not merely surface syntax),
• the RSVP admissibility framework (the scalar field Φ > 0 encodes regions of configuration
space where attractor stability is maintained), and
• open-source recomposition (composability is possible because recomposable systems share
attractor structure across their extension surfaces, not merely compatible type signatures).
Without this bridge, the transition from Python interpreters to field-theoretic language may
seem abrupt. With it, the progression is conceptually continuous: each layer of formalism
describes the same phenomenon — the persistence of recoverable developmental structure under
perturbation — at a different scale and resolution.
The esolang as minimal model organism.
In this sense /æmbiːɛf/ functions as what bi-
ologists call a model organism: a system deliberately chosen for its tractability rather than its
representativeness, from which general principles can be extracted and transferred to less tractable
domains. Just as C. elegans reveals principles of developmental biology that transfer to vertebrates,
/æmbiːɛf/ reveals principles of admissibility geometry that transfer to GitHub repositories, LLM
training dynamics, and RSVP field theory. The worked example is not a detour from the main
argument. It is the main argument at its most legible scale.
7
A Worked Example: Spherepop over /æmbiːɛf/
The argument so far has remained at the level of ecosystem dynamics. To make it concrete, we
need a worked example: an actual repository, developed in stages, whose publication history
instantiates the theoretical claims rather than merely illustrating them. The example chosen here
is deliberately non-trivial. It is not a utility script or a data-processing tool. It is an implementation
of Spherepop semantics over a probabilistic substrate language called /æmbiːɛf/, and its interest
lies precisely in the fact that the system it implements is itself a model of how stable meaning
emerges from unreliable substrates. The repository becomes, in this sense, a miniature of the
larger ecosystem it is embedded in.
14

/æmbiːɛf/ is a Brainfuck derivative created by ais523 in 2012. Its design is deliberately
adversarial toward determinism. Where Brainfuck provides distinct increment and decrement
operators, /æmbiːɛf/ collapses them into a single instruction that randomly does either. Where
Brainfuck provides distinct left and right pointer movements, /æmbiːɛf/ collapses these into
a single instruction that randomly does either. The bracket instructions [ and ] retain their
Brainfuck semantics, but since the arithmetic and movement operators are both nondeterministic,
the control flow they govern operates over a stochastic field rather than a deterministic memory.
The tape is infinite in both directions and every cell holds a bignum value, which provides
unexpectedly rich storage capacity, but that capacity is accessible only through probabilistic
navigation.
The consequence is philosophically significant. This is not merely randomized Brainfuck. The
randomness is structural: every directional and arithmetic intention in the source code is erased
at the operational level. A program that writes + and a program that writes - are operationally
identical. The source code contains apparent semantic content that the runtime systematically
destroys. Syntax no longer cleanly determines execution. Meaning exists only as a distribution
over possible trajectories.
This raises a question that makes the language genuinely interesting as a theoretical object
rather than a mere curiosity: how much determinism is actually necessary for computation? The
Turing-completeness of /æmbiːɛf/ remains an open question, but the analysis in the original
language specification demonstrates that reliable computation can emerge from unreliable prim-
itives [14]. By encoding counter values not as single tape cells but as parity-structured fields
distributed across tape regions, the language allows certain invariants to be recovered statistically
even when exact cell values cannot be trusted. Parity remains one of the few geometric properties
that survives noisy drift with recoverable probability. This connects /æmbiːɛf/ to von Neumann's
classical result on reliable computation from unreliable components [14], to error-correcting
codes [5], and to the broader family of systems where stable structure emerges from stochastic
substrates [25].
A minimal Python interpreter for /æmbiːɛf/ captures these dynamics directly:
import random
from collections import defaultdict
class AmbiBFMachine:
def __init__(self):
self.tape = defaultdict(int)
self.ptr = 0
def step(self, command):
if command in "+-":
15

self.tape[self.ptr] += random.choice([-1, 1])
elif command in "<>":
self.ptr += random.choice([-1, 1])
def run(self, code, max_steps=100000):
brackets = self.match_brackets(code)
ip = 0
steps = 0
while ip < len(code) and steps < max_steps:
c = code[ip]
if c == "[":
if self.tape[self.ptr] == 0:
ip = brackets[ip]
elif c == "]":
if self.tape[self.ptr] != 0:
ip = brackets[ip]
else:
self.step(c)
ip += 1
steps += 1
return dict(self.tape)
@staticmethod
def match_brackets(code):
stack, pairs = [], {}
for i, c in enumerate(code):
if c == "[":
stack.append(i)
elif c == "]":
if not stack:
raise SyntaxError("Unmatched ]")
j = stack.pop()
pairs[i] = j
pairs[j] = i
if stack:
raise SyntaxError("Unmatched [")
return pairs
This is the lamphron moment: a compact, specialized, self-contained artifact that makes
a single architectural commitment visible. The bracket-matching function is deterministic.
The tape is a defaultdict. The step function delegates all nondeterminism to a single
16

random.choice call. Every design decision encodes an irreversible constraint. The choice to
use a hash map rather than a list encodes a commitment to infinite sparse tape. The max_steps
guard encodes a commitment to termination safety. The bracket matching as a preprocessing
pass rather than a runtime scan encodes a commitment to O(1) jump cost. These are Spherepop
events: irreversible constraints that narrow the option-space of future extensions while keeping
the trajectory inside the admissible region Φ > 0.
A model ingesting this repository does not memorize the file. It updates its representation of
what it looks like when a stochastic tape machine is implemented carefully: what the bracket-
matching idiom looks like, what the defaultdict pattern signals about tape geometry, what
the separation between step and run reveals about the intended extension surface. These are
procedural patterns that transfer. The file is training data not primarily for its content but for its
developmental geometry.
Parity Invariance Under Stochastic Drift
The key insight enabling reliable computation on this substrate is that parity is preserved under
symmetric random walks. We formalize this as follows.
Lemma 7.1 (Parity Preservation). Let p(t) ∈Z be the tape pointer evolving under the /æmbiːɛf/
movement rule: at each step, p(t + 1) = p(t) + ηt where ηt ∈{−1, +1} with equal probability.
Then the parity p(t) mod 2 is deterministic given p(0): p(t) mod 2 = (p(0) + t) mod 2 for all t.
Proof. Since ηt ∈{−1, +1}, we have ηt ≡1 (mod 2) in both cases. Therefore p(t + 1) ≡
p(t) + 1 (mod 2) at every step, regardless of the random outcome. By induction, p(t) ≡p(0) + t
(mod 2).
Corollary 7.2 (Dead Reckoning). A program executing on /æmbiːɛf/ can always determine the
current parity of the tape pointer by counting steps, even with no access to the pointer's absolute
position. This is the foundational invariant on which the counter encoding described in the original
language specification rests.
Remark 7.3. The lemma shows that parity is the unique positional invariant preserved under
arbitrary symmetric random walks on Z: all other modular invariants are destroyed by stochastic
drift. The /æmbiːɛf/ encoding strategy is therefore not merely clever but optimal given the substrate's
constraints.
8
Bubbles as Metastable Attractors: The Spherepop Layer
The AmbiBFMachine alone is a substrate interpreter. It demonstrates that /æmbiːɛf/ dynam-
ics can be simulated, but it does not yet raise the question that makes the system theoretically
17

interesting: can coherent semantic structures persist on this substrate despite continuous stochas-
tic erosion? Answering this question requires a second layer, and the second layer is Spherepop.
In the Spherepop formalism, a bubble is not a variable. It is a named localized field whose
value emerges through stabilization rather than assignment. Applied to an /æmbiːɛf/ substrate,
a bubble is a parity-preserving neighborhood of tape cells whose collective behavior encodes a
semantic state that survives repeated perturbation. The parity constraint is essential: it is one of
the few geometric properties that can be recovered statistically after noisy pointer drift, because
the even-odd structure of tape positions is invariant under the symmetric random walk (see
Appendix B for the formal definition of bubble support regions).
A minimal Spherepop layer over the interpreter captures this directly:
class Spherepop:
def __init__(self):
self.machine = AmbiBFMachine()
self.bubbles = {}
self.next_cell = 0
def bubble(self, name):
self.bubbles[name] = self.next_cell
self.next_cell += 2
def focus(self, name):
target = self.bubbles[name]
while self.machine.ptr != target:
if self.machine.ptr < target:
self.machine.ptr += 1
else:
self.machine.ptr -= 1
def jiggle(self, name, amount=1):
self.focus(name)
for _ in range(amount):
self.machine.run("+")
def pop(self, name):
self.focus(name)
self.machine.run("[+]")
def stabilize(self, name, attempts=101):
self.focus(name)
values = [self.machine.tape[self.machine.ptr]
18

for _ in range(attempts)]
positives = sum(1 for v in values if v > 0)
negatives = sum(1 for v in values if v < 0)
if positives > negatives:
return "+bubble"
elif negatives > positives:
return "-bubble"
else:
return "void"
def read(self):
return {name: self.machine.tape[cell]
for name, cell in self.bubbles.items()}
Four operations define the minimal Spherepop interface. bubble allocates a named region
with spacing of two cells to reduce parity contamination between neighbors. focus navigates
deterministically to the bubble center — the one place where the Spherepop layer reasserts spatial
authority over the drifting substrate. jiggle perturbs the bubble stochastically, accumulating
energy in the local field. pop applies the [+] idiom, injecting symmetric perturbations until
the local field decoheres to zero: not a variable assignment, but an entropic collapse event.
stabilize classifies the bubble by repeated observation, returning a semantic state determined
by majority vote. This is not reading a memory address. It is a measurement over a distribution.
The mortality consequence is immediate and formally sharp. Left to evolve under unbiased
/æmbiːɛf/ dynamics, every bubble eventually decoheres to zero with probability one (Appendix D,
Theorem D.1). Semantic structures on this tape are mortal. They persist only through active
stabilization, which means that computation on this substrate is not the execution of a static
program but the ongoing governance of metastable attractors against entropic drift.
The lamphrodyne extension takes the bubble metaphor seriously as a field phenomenon rather
than a naming convention:
class Bubble:
def __init__(self, center, parity, radius):
self.center = center
self.parity = parity
self.radius = radius
def sample_field(machine, bubble):
return [machine.tape[i]
for i in range(bubble.center - bubble.radius,
bubble.center + bubble.radius + 1)
if abs(i % 2) == bubble.parity]
19

def semantic_state(values):
energy = sum(abs(v) for v in values)
polarity = sum(values)
if energy == 0:
return "void"
if polarity > 0:
return "coherent-positive"
if polarity < 0:
return "coherent-negative"
return "chaotic"
This is the lamphrodyne moment: the single-cell bubble model has been integrated into
a richer semantic architecture where meaning emerges from field distributions, stabilization
is a regional governance process, and the boundary between coherent and chaotic states is a
continuous quantity rather than a binary flag. The two-stage development is itself a small instance
of the lamphron-lamphrodyne feedback loop that the essay has been describing at ecosystem
scale.
Stabilization Threshold and Majority Vote
The stabilize method implements a majority vote over a sample of size n = 101. We
derive the minimum number of samples needed to guarantee a reliable classification with high
probability.
Let p ∈(1/2, 1] be the true probability that a tape cell has positive value at any given
observation time. The majority vote returns "+bubble" if more than n/2 observations are
positive.
Proposition 8.1 (Sample Sufficiency for Stabilization). Let X1, . . . , Xn be independent Bernoulli(p)
observations of a bubble cell sign (1 for positive, 0 otherwise). The majority vote estimator ˆp =
1[P
i Xi > n/2] satisfies
Pr
 ˆp ̸= 1[p > 1/2]

≤2 exp

−2n(p −1/2)2
by Hoeffding's inequality. For p −1/2 = δ and error tolerance ε > 0, the sufficient sample size is
n ≥ln(2/ε)
2δ2
.
Corollary 8.2. For a bubble with coherence advantage δ = 0.1 (ten percent more positive observa-
tions than negative) and error tolerance ε = 0.01, the required sample size is n ≥⌈ln(200)/0.02⌉=
20

266. The implementation uses n = 101, which is sufficient for δ ≥0.15 at the same confidence level.
A production implementation should parameterize n as a function of the expected substrate noise
level.
9
The Three Tiers of Admissibility
The important property of the Spherepop interpreter is not that it works perfectly, but that its
failures remain geometrically legible. Even when stabilization collapses — when the governance
coefficient is too small, when the bubble radius is poorly chosen, when the focus function
navigates to the wrong parity class — the system retains a recoverable semantic topology. The
parity structure, the replay logic, the attractor regions, and the mortality-management strategies
remain inferable from the event history. A reader encountering a broken version of this interpreter
can reconstruct what kind of system it was trying to become. This distinction between recoverable
semantic failure and irrecoverable noise is precisely what separates repositories that contribute
to the collective procedural substrate from uploads that remain informationally inert.
To make this distinction rigorous, we must separate two quantities that are frequently con-
flated in discussions of training data quality: informational content in the Shannon sense [18], and
admissible replay structure in the Spherepop sense. These quantities are orthogonal. A random
byte stream can carry arbitrarily high Shannon entropy while containing zero recoverable proce-
dural trajectory. Conversely, a partially broken repository may contain syntax errors, dead code,
and incomplete implementations while still exposing extremely rich developmental geometry. The
crucial quantity for training manifold contribution is not raw information density but admissible
replay structure: the degree to which an artifact's event history can be reconstructed and extended
by a reader — human or model — encountering it.
This gives a three-tier taxonomy of repository contributions, grounded in the admissibility
geometry of the preceding sections.
The first tier comprises well-formed repositories with stable semantic normal forms. The
Spherepop interpreter, published with documentation and mathematical appendices, is an example.
Every design decision encodes an irreversible constraint that narrows the option-space of future
extensions while maintaining the trajectory inside Φ > 0. A model ingesting this repository
learns the parity structure of the tape, the stabilization loop pattern, the relationship between
bubble energy and semantic persistence, the Python idioms for probabilistic field dynamics, and
the mathematical vocabulary connecting entropy to coherence. It learns these things not by
memorizing the file but by updating its representation of what coherent procedural reasoning
over stochastic substrates looks like across multiple levels of abstraction simultaneously.
The second tier comprises broken repositories with recoverable architectural intent. Consider
a version of the Spherepop interpreter in which the stabilize method contains an off-by-
21

one error in the sample window, causing systematic bias in bubble classification at boundary
conditions. The interpreter is wrong, but it still encodes the parity assumption, the majority-vote
protocol, the three-way distinction between positive, negative, and void semantic states, and
the architectural decision to separate measurement from governance. A fork that corrects the
off-by-one error leaves all of these intact. In the RSVP framework this repository sits near Z(Φ):
on the admissibility boundary, potentially crossable via forking.
The third tier comprises uploads with no recoverable semantic structure. A table of random
numbers occupies a categorically different region from either of the first two tiers. It contains
no Spherepop normal form because there is no sequence of irreversible design decisions to
reconstruct. There is no parity assumption to infer, no stabilization strategy to extend, no attractor
geometry to fork. A recording of radio static is similarly outside the admissibility manifold: its
Shannon entropy may be high, but its developmental vector field is null. No fork of a static
recording becomes a Spherepop interpreter.
A repository's contribution to the collective substrate is therefore proportional not to its
size, not to its Shannon entropy, and not even to its correctness, but to the recoverability of its
semantic attractor under perturbation:
A(R) ∝recoverable semantic structure
perturbation magnitude
.
Orthogonality of Shannon Entropy and Replay Structure
Proposition 9.1 (Independence of Information Measures). Shannon entropy H and admissible
replay structure A are statistically independent in the space of all byte sequences. That is, for any
values h and a, there exist repositories with H = h and A = a in all four combinations of high/low.
Proof sketch. High H, high A: a large well-formed codebase with many distinct tokens. Low H,
high A: a minimal interpreter using a small alphabet (e.g., the AmbiBFMachine itself). High
H, low A: a table of uniform random bytes — maximal Shannon entropy, zero architectural intent.
Low H, low A: a file of identical bytes — minimal entropy, no recoverable design trajectory. All
four cases are constructible, so the measures are not monotonically related in either direction.
Corollary 9.2. Filtering training corpora by Shannon entropy (a standard quality heuristic) does
not reliably select for high A. A corpus filter optimized for developmental geometry would require a
distinct criterion: something closer to compressibility of the commit history, architectural coherence
of the dependency graph, or forkability under perturbation.
22

10
Commit Histories as Temporal Geometry
The three-tier admissibility taxonomy classifies repositories by the recoverability of their semantic
attractor. But repositories are not static objects: they are processes unfolding in time, and their
admissibility structure is encoded not only in their current state but in the discretized trace
through semantic configuration space that their commit history records. This section formalizes
that observation and connects it to the Lamport clock structure underlying distributed version
control.
Commits as irreversible constraint applications.
Each commit to a repository applies a
transformation Tn to the current semantic state xn, producing xn+1 = Tn(xn). In the RSVP
framework, this corresponds to an increment in the entropy field S along the development
trajectory: each Tn that moves the codebase further into {Φ > 0} represents an irreversible
narrowing of the future option-space. The commit sequence (T1, T2, . . . , Tn) is therefore the
Spherepop normal form of the repository: the ordered sequence of irreversible decisions whose
composition constitutes the repository's semantic identity.
Definition 10.1 (Developmental Trace). The developmental trace of a repository R with commit
history (T1, . . . , Tn) is the sequence of states
x0, x1 = T1(x0), x2 = T2(x1), . . . , xn = Tn(xn−1),
together with the associated constraint tightening sequence S0 ≤S1 ≤· · · ≤Sn induced by the
entropy field. The trace is recoverable if the sequence (T1, . . . , Tn) can be reconstructed from partial
evidence with bounded error.
A Tier 1 repository has a fully recoverable developmental trace: every design decision is
inferrable from the public commit history and accompanying documentation. A Tier 2 repository
has a partially recoverable trace: some commits are missing, some transformations are ambiguous,
but the overall architectural trajectory remains inferable. A Tier 3 upload has no recoverable
trace: there is no sequence of intentional transformations to reconstruct.
Commit hashes as Lamport timestamps.
This connects to a precise analogy raised by the
Lamport clock literature. A Lamport timestamp [10] assigns a logical time qt to each event
in a distributed system such that causal precedence is preserved: if event A causally precedes
event B, then qA < qB. Critically, Lamport timestamps encode causal order without requiring
global synchronization — they are the minimal invariant that survives distributed, asynchronous
computation.
23

Git commit hashes are the executable analogue of Lamport timestamps. Each commit hash
encodes the complete causal history of the repository up to that point: it is a cryptographic
summary of all prior commits, all file contents, and the commit message. Like a Lamport clock,
the hash encodes causal order without requiring central coordination. Like parity in /æmbiːɛf/,
it is the minimal invariant that survives the distributed, asynchronous process of collaborative
development.
Proposition 10.2 (Commit Hashes as Causal Parity). Let qt denote the commit hash at step t in a
repository's history. Then:
1. qt determines a unique causal past for the repository at time t (by the collision resistance of
the underlying hash function);
2. if qt is known, the developmental trace (T1, . . . , Tt) is in principle recoverable from the Git
object store;
3. two repositories with the same qt are semantically identical at time t regardless of when, where,
or by whom they were created.
Commit hashes are therefore the distributed version control analogue of parity bits: the unique
causal invariant that survives stochastic, asynchronous development and permits dead reckoning of
developmental position.
The analogy extends further. Just as parity preservation in /æmbiːɛf/ is the foundational in-
variant enabling metastable computation on a noisy substrate (Lemma 7.1), commit-hash integrity
is the foundational invariant enabling semantic persistence in the distributed, asynchronous devel-
opment process. A repository without intact commit history — a snapshot without provenance —
loses its developmental trace in exactly the way a bubble loses its parity structure when the pointer
drifts to an unknown position. The admissibility of the artifact depends on the recoverability of
its causal history, not only on the content of its current state.
Issue threads and branch histories as developmental debris.
Beyond commits, repositories
typically expose additional layers of developmental geometry: issue threads record the reasoning
behind architectural decisions and the failure modes encountered during development; branch
histories record exploratory trajectories that were not merged; pull request discussions record
the deliberation process by which competing extensions were adjudicated. All of these are
instances of what we have called intermediate cognitive states — externally persistent records
of the developmental process that would, under any previous publication system, have been
discarded as ancillary metadata.
24

In the present framework they are not ancillary. They are the primary evidence from which the
developmental trace is reconstructible. A repository whose issue threads document a debate about
whether to use majority-vote or maximum-likelihood stabilization exposes more developmental
geometry than one whose commits simply implement the final choice. The former allows a reader
— human or model — to reconstruct the decision boundary, the alternatives considered, and
the criteria used to adjudicate between them. This is trajectory information that no snapshot
preserves.
11
What Generative Algorithms Learn
The three-tier taxonomy has an immediate consequence for understanding what generative AI
systems actually acquire from training on the GitHub corpus, and why that acquisition differs
qualitatively from training on any other text corpus of comparable size.
The surface account of LLM training on code is straightforward: the model sees many pro-
grams and learns to predict likely continuations. This account is not wrong, but it substantially
understates what is actually being learned. A model trained on the Spherepop repository and its
forks does not merely learn Python syntax or interpreter patterns. It learns the following across
multiple levels of abstraction simultaneously: that probabilistic substrates require parity-based
invariants to support reliable computation; that semantic stability is a governance problem rather
than a storage problem; that the distinction between chaotic and void states requires a regional
field sample rather than a point observation; that lamphron implementations are typically fol-
lowed by lamphrodyne extensions that reinterpret the original abstractions as special cases of
richer geometric structures; and that mathematical appendices encode the formal substrate of
claims made informally in the implementation. None of this is explicitly stated anywhere in the
repository. All of it is inferable from the developmental geometry of the artifact.
This is the sense in which the GitHub corpus trains generative systems not merely on outputs
but on pathways through abstraction space. The training signal is not primarily correctness. It is
recoverable development. A model that has seen many well-formed repositories learns what it
looks like when an abstract idea is successfully compiled into executable form across multiple
stages of extension and refinement. A model that has seen many near-boundary repositories
additionally learns what failure modes look like at various developmental stages, which is essential
for generating plausible continuations of incomplete code. A model trained exclusively on polished,
formally verified programs would miss most of this developmental geometry, because polished
artifacts conceal the stabilization process that produced them. The incomplete repositories are
not deficiencies in the training corpus. They are the primary carriers of developmental structure.
This provides a precise answer to the natural objection that compute scale, not corpus structure,
drives capability growth. The objection conflates scale with substrate. Scale amplifies whatever
25

signal the substrate provides. If the substrate is rich in admissible replay structure — as the
GitHub corpus is, specifically because of the incentive structures described in §3 — then scale
propagates that richness into the model's representations. If the substrate were primarily noise,
scale would propagate noise. Remove the GitHub substrate and apply the same compute to a
corpus of equivalent size but lower admissibility density, and the result is not a weaker version of
current capability. It is a qualitatively different and substantially less capable system.
The recursion that closed is therefore more precisely characterized than the earlier formulation
suggested. LLMs train on the developmental geometry of the GitHub corpus and thereby acquire
the capacity to generate artifacts that themselves possess admissible developmental geometry
— artifacts that are architecturally legible, extensible, and capable of functioning as lamphron
nucleation sites for the next generation of lamphrodyne integration. The ecosystem does not
merely accelerate. It improves the quality of its own training signal recursively.
Generalization Bound for Developmental Geometry
Let D be a training distribution over repositories and let A(D) denote the mean admissibility
score of sampled repositories. We can bound the expected generalization of a model trained on D
in terms of A(D).
Proposition 11.1 (Developmental Generalization). Let fθ be a language model trained by empirical
risk minimization on n repositories sampled from D. For any target developmental task τ requiring
recovery of architectural intent at depth d, the expected error on τ satisfies
E[errτ(fθ)] ≤C ·
1
A(D) ·
r
VC(fθ) ln n
n
,
where C > 0 is a constant depending on τ and VC(fθ) is the VC dimension of the model class.
This bound shows that increasing n (scale) reduces error at rate O(1/√n), but increasing
A(D) reduces error multiplicatively. A corpus with twice the admissibility density is equivalent
to a corpus four times larger in its effect on the error bound. This formalizes the intuition that
corpus structure matters as much as corpus scale: improving the admissibility of the training
distribution has superlinear returns compared to simply adding more data.
12
Gradient Legibility and the LLM as Manifold-Compression
Operator
The preceding sections characterized generative AI as a navigational accelerant over the GitHub
substrate. This section makes that characterization more precise by distinguishing four properties
26

of a repository graph that a capable model must separately address, and arguing that LLMs
contribute specifically to the last of these.
Accessibility.
A repository graph is accessible if its contents can be retrieved by an agent
with network connectivity. GitHub made the graph globally accessible through standardized
URLs, public forks, and open licensing. This is a necessary but far from sufficient precondition for
exploitation. A graph of ten million repositories that no agent can efficiently search is accessible
but not practically navigable.
Searchability.
A repository graph is searchable if an agent can locate relevant nodes given
a query. GitHub provides keyword search, topic tagging, and star ranking. These heuristics
are crude: they retrieve repositories matching surface tokens rather than repositories whose
developmental geometry aligns with a target architecture. A developer seeking a probabilistic
tape interpreter may not find one by searching for "stochastic brainfuck." Searchability addresses
surface similarity but not developmental proximity.
Recomposability.
A repository graph is recomposable if its nodes can be integrated into new
systems with bounded friction. The central argument of this paper is that GitHub dramatically
reduced this friction through standardized dependency declaration, versioned interfaces, and
composable build tooling. Recomposability is a structural property of the graph, not of any
individual node: it depends on how edges are defined, how interfaces are declared, and how
conflict resolution is supported.
Semantic legibility.
A repository graph is semantically legible if an agent can infer the devel-
opmental geometry of a node from partial evidence: given a fragment of a codebase, determine
the architectural trajectory it encodes, predict likely extensions, identify analogous structures
elsewhere in the graph, and generate continuations that respect the latent invariants. This
is the property that LLMs contribute. None of the preceding three properties — accessibility,
searchability, or recomposability — requires a language model. Semantic legibility does.
Definition 12.1 (Manifold-Compression Operator). Let G be a repository graph embedded in a
high-dimensional procedural state space P. A manifold-compression operator C : P →P′ is a
map to a lower-dimensional space P′ such that:
1. geodesic distances in P′ approximate developmental distances in P (repositories with similar
architectural trajectories map to nearby points);
2. the map is approximately invertible on the admissible submanifold {Φ > 0} (a point in P′
determines an approximately unique Tier 1 trajectory in P);
27

3. queries in P′ can be answered with substantially lower search cost than equivalent queries in
P.
An LLM trained on the GitHub corpus is an empirical approximation of such a manifold-
compression operator. Its embedding space is P′; its attention mechanism implements approxi-
mate nearest-neighbor search in that space; its generative capabilities implement approximate
inversion back to P. The quality of the approximation depends directly on A(D): a training
corpus with high admissibility density produces a more faithful compression because the latent
structure is richer and more recoverable.
Proposition 12.2 (LLM as Friction Reduction). Let C be a manifold-compression operator trained
on G with admissibility density A. The effective recombination friction between repositories Ri, Rj
under C-mediated search satisfies
ρC(Ri, Rj) ≤
ρ(Ri, Rj)
A · dim(P)/ dim(P′),
where dim(P)/ dim(P′) is the compression ratio. Higher admissibility and higher compression both
reduce effective friction.
This proposition formalizes the intuition that LLMs reduce navigational cost without altering
the underlying geometry: they compress the search problem but do not generate new admissible
trajectories ex nihilo. A model that hallucinates a repository architecture not grounded in any
existing developmental trajectory has produced output in P′ \ π(G) — outside the image of the
graph under compression — which will typically fail to compose with real infrastructure precisely
because it lacks the accumulated constraint structure that real repositories carry.
13
Developmental Geometry Across Representational Layers
One of the most important properties of the Spherepop-over-/æmbiːɛf/ example is that the
developmental trajectory does not terminate at the implementation layer. The repository does not
merely contain executable code. It participates in a larger representational manifold extending
across operational systems, mathematical appendices, field-theoretic monographs, categorical
abstractions, and simulation methodologies simultaneously. The developmental geometry exposed
to the training manifold therefore exists across multiple semantic strata at once.
This becomes especially clear when the repository is interpreted alongside the RSVP and
Quantum SpherePop papers. The original AmbiBFMachine implementation defines a mini-
mal stochastic substrate whose operational semantics are governed by noisy pointer drift and
probabilistic arithmetic transitions. The minimal Spherepop layer introduces metastable se-
mantic regions stabilized through repeated sampling and parity-preserving constraints. The
28

field-theoretic extensions in the accompanying monographs then reinterpret these operational
intuitions in terms of coarse-grained RSVP fields, entropy-respecting dynamics, synchronization
manifolds, and lattice quantization schemes. The abstractions survive extension pressure because
they preserve invariant developmental structure across layers.
The crucial observation is that these layers are not independent. The operational code con-
strains the mathematical language that later emerges around it. The mathematical formalism
retrospectively clarifies the implementation decisions encoded in the repository history. The
categorical descriptions unify both into a broader semantic architecture. The result is not a
set of disconnected artifacts but a single developmental attractor expressed through multiple
representational media.
This is precisely the kind of structure that generative systems appear unusually effective
at internalizing. A model trained on the combined corpus does not simply learn a Python
interpreter, a field theory, and a category-theoretic formalism as separate objects. It learns
that these objects occupy neighboring regions in abstraction space and participate in the same
stabilization trajectory. The developmental signal therefore propagates not only through code
reuse but through cross-layer semantic alignment.
14
Quantum SpherePop and Semantic Quantization
The following three sections reinterpret the same developmental trajectory across progressively
richer representational layers: operational implementation, stochastic semantic fields, replay
geometry, and finally RSVP admissibility dynamics. The purpose is not to multiply ontologies
but to show that the same invariants survive translation across representational media. Each
layer exposes structure latent in the one before it; none contradicts the others. The escalation in
formalism is recursive reinterpretation, not conceptual drift.
The developmental trajectory from the minimal AmbiBFMachine implementation to the
later Quantum SpherePop formalism is not merely an increase in implementation complexity. It
is a semantic quantization sequence. The original interpreter already contains, in low-resolution
operational form, many of the structural relations that later appear explicitly in the RSVP field-
theoretic framework.
In the minimal implementation, a bubble is represented as a parity-preserving neighborhood
of tape cells whose semantic state emerges through repeated stabilization under stochastic per-
turbation. In the Quantum SpherePop framework, local semantic regions are instead represented
by complex amplitude fields:
Ψi = rieiθi,
where amplitude ri encodes entropic magnitude and phase θi encodes semantic coherence. The
29

correspondence is structurally direct. The parity-preserving bubble neighborhoods of the inter-
preter become coarse approximations of phase-coherent regions in a coupled semantic lattice. The
stochastic drift of the substrate becomes a discrete analogue of vacuum fluctuation and entropic
perturbation. The stabilization loop becomes a primitive synchronization operator acting over
neighboring semantic regions.
The repository trajectory therefore behaves like a semantic renormalization flow:
AmbiBFMachine −→Spherepop −→Quantum SpherePop.
Each stage preserves invariant developmental geometry while increasing representational richness.
The operational implementation and the later mathematical framework are therefore not separate
artifacts but adjacent regions of the same developmental manifold.
Renormalization as Coarse-Graining
The three-stage sequence is an instance of Wilsonian renormalization: at each scale, fine-grained
degrees of freedom are integrated out, leaving an effective theory that captures the infrared
behavior.
Definition 14.1 (Semantic Renormalization Group). Let S0 be the space of /æmbiːɛf/ tape
configurations. Define a coarse-graining map πk : S0 →Sk that sends each tape configuration to its
bubble coherence vector at scale k:
πk(s) =
 C(B1), C(B2), . . . , C(Bm)

where C(Bj) = P
i∈Ωj si is the signed coherence of bubble j and m is the number of bubbles. The
sequence (πk)k≥0 defines a renormalization group acting on semantic states.
Proposition 14.2 (Fixed Points of Semantic RG). The fixed points of the semantic renormalization
group are the configurations in which each bubble is either maximally coherent (C(Bj) = ±E(Bj))
or void (C(Bj) = 0). These correspond to the stable semantic states coherent-positive,
coherent-negative, and void in the semantic_state function.
Proof sketch. Under repeated stabilization, the reinforcement operator Rλ drives each bubble
toward the sign of its current coherence (Appendix E). A configuration is a fixed point when
further stabilization does not change any bubble's sign. This occurs when every bubble has
coherence strictly positive, strictly negative, or zero — the three fixed-point classes above.
30

15
Replay as Coarse-Grained Semantic Reconstruction
One of the deepest properties of the GitHub ecosystem is that repositories are not consumed stat-
ically. They are replayed. Forks, ports, rewrites, patches, dependency updates, and architectural
reinterpretations are all replay operations over developmental trajectories.
In the Spherepop formalism, replay does not preserve exact state identity. Instead it regen-
erates a statistically stable attractor under perturbation. A semantic object persists not because
every replay is identical, but because the replay sequence converges toward a recoverable semantic
region despite local divergence:
σn ∼Pn.
The GitHub ecosystem behaves similarly. A repository fork is not a perfect copy of an artifact. It is
a coarse-grained reconstruction of developmental intent under altered environmental constraints.
Dependencies change. APIs drift. Architectures are partially rewritten. Yet semantic identity
often persists across these perturbations because the attractor geometry remains recoverable.
This interpretation aligns closely with the RSVP/TARTAN coarse-graining framework in which
observable structures emerge from lower-level field dynamics through projection operators:
π : X(t) →χi(t).
The raw repository state corresponds to the inaccessible microdynamic layer. Replay operations
act as coarse-graining transformations over developmental history. The resulting semantic object
is therefore not a static file tree but a metastable equivalence class generated by repeated replay
under changing conditions.
This explains why commit histories are often more educational than snapshots. A snapshot
reveals what a repository is. A replay history reveals how semantic coherence was preserved
while the system changed. Generative systems trained on such histories therefore acquire not
merely static representations of code but representations of stabilization dynamics themselves —
and it explains why open ecosystems accelerate capability growth more effectively than closed
proprietary systems. Open repositories undergo continual replay by many independent agents
simultaneously: forks, patches, reinterpretations, optimizations, ports, and integrations. Each
replay operation exposes additional developmental geometry to the collective substrate.
Convergence of Replay Distributions
Definition 15.1 (Semantic Attractor). A repository R has a well-defined semantic attractor if the
sequence of replay distributions {Pn}n≥1 converges weakly to a limiting distribution P∞concentrated
on a compact set A(R) ⊂configuration space.
31

Theorem 15.2 (Attractor Existence under Stabilization). Let R be a Tier 1 repository whose
architectural commitments impose a Lyapunov function V : S →R≥0 satisfying E[V (σn+1) |
σn] ≤V (σn)−α for some α > 0 outside a compact set K. Then the replay distributions Pn converge
weakly to a unique stationary distribution P∞supported on K.
Proof sketch. The condition on V is a Foster-Lyapunov drift criterion (Foster's theorem). It
implies positive recurrence of the Markov chain (σn)n≥0 on S, which by the ergodic theorem
guarantees weak convergence to a unique stationary measure. The compact support follows from
the sublevel-set compactness of V .
Corollary 15.3. Tier 2 repositories (those near the admissibility boundary) lack a uniform Lyapunov
function satisfying the drift condition globally; they may converge locally but have positive probability
of escaping the compact set under large perturbations. Tier 3 repositories satisfy no drift condition:
without architectural structure, V cannot be defined, and no attractor exists.
16
Phase Synchronization and the Collective Procedural Field
The Quantum SpherePop framework introduces a particularly important reinterpretation of
semantic coherence: coherence is not exact symbolic agreement but partial phase synchronization
across distributed semantic regions. The local phase evolution equation
˙θi = ωi +
X
j∈N(i)
Kij sin(θj −θi) +
√
2D ηi(t)
defines coherence as an emergent property of coupled stochastic dynamics rather than centralized
control [11]. Here ωi is the natural frequency of region i, Kij is the coupling strength between
neighboring regions, D is the noise intensity, and ηi(t) is independent white noise at each site.
This provides a remarkably precise description of how large-scale open-source ecosystems
evolve. Repositories are not globally coordinated through a single architectural authority. Instead
local synchronization occurs through dependency compatibility, shared interfaces, community
conventions, benchmark standards, framework ecosystems, and repeated replay interactions
across neighboring projects. The resulting ecosystem resembles a distributed semantic phase
field. Local regions synchronize partially while preserving diversity at larger scales. Forks
generate phase divergence. Standards generate synchronization pressure. Merge operations
reduce local incoherence. Stable abstractions emerge as phase-locked attractors surviving repeated
perturbation across the collective graph.
The intelligence explosion can therefore be interpreted not merely as an increase in model
capability but as a phase transition in the coherence of the global procedural substrate itself.
32

GitHub externalized developmental trajectories into a globally replayable semantic field. Gen-
erative systems trained on that field acquired the ability to navigate, reconstruct, and extend
those trajectories statistically. The result is not artificial intelligence emerging ex nihilo. It is
the planetary procedural field becoming partially self-modeling through recursive replay and
synthesis.
Critical Coupling and the Synchronization Transition
The Kuramoto model exhibits a phase transition at a critical coupling strength Kc. We derive the
analogue for the GitHub ecosystem.
In the Kuramoto model on a complete graph of N oscillators with natural frequencies drawn
from a symmetric unimodal distribution g(ω) with half-width ∆, the critical coupling is:
Kc =
2
πg(0).
For a Lorentzian distribution g(ω) =
∆
π(ω2+∆2), one has g(0) = 1/(π∆) and thus Kc = 2∆.
Proposition 16.1 (Ecosystem Synchronization Threshold). Interpret each repository as an oscillator
with natural frequency ωi encoding its architectural style (rate of change, abstraction level, domain
specificity) and coupling strength Kij encoding the dependency weight between Ri and Rj. The
ecosystem transitions from a fragmented (incoherent) state to a partially synchronized state when
the mean coupling strength ¯K exceeds Kc = 2∆, where ∆is the spread of architectural styles in the
ecosystem.
GitHub's structural innovations — standardized dependency declaration, semantic versioning,
shared CI tooling — simultaneously increased ¯K and reduced ∆, pushing the ecosystem from below
to above Kc.
Corollary 16.2 (Irreversibility of the Transition). Once ¯K > Kc, the synchronized state is
a global attractor: the fraction of synchronized repositories r(t) →r∞> 0 as t →∞. The
transition is irreversible in the sense that reducing ¯K back below Kc requires dismantling the
coupling infrastructure (e.g., removing package managers, eliminating semantic versioning), not
merely reducing individual dependency counts.
17
RSVP Connections: GitHub as Planetary Admissibility Geom-
etry
The GitHub ecosystem can be mapped onto the RSVP field-theoretic framework with considerable
precision, and doing so clarifies both the nature of the acceleration and its theoretical relationship
to other phenomena modeled within that framework.
33

In the RSVP framework, the scalar field Φ encodes the density of constraint-satisfying
configurations: regions where Φ > 0 correspond to admissible states, while the zero-set
Z(Φ) = {p ∈M : Φ(p) = 0} marks the constraint boundary at which physical or epistemic
admissibility fails. The vector field v encodes the directed flow of evolution through configuration
space, and the entropy field S tracks the irreversible accumulation of structural commitment along
trajectories. The field equations enforce a monotonicity condition: along any admissible trajectory,
S is non-decreasing, and strictly increasing wherever the constraint gradient ∥∇Φ∥2 > 0.
Under this mapping, the GitHub repository graph corresponds to a high-dimensional configu-
ration space of executable cognitive states. Each repository is a point in that space: a particular
constraint-satisfying configuration of code, documentation, architecture, and dependency struc-
ture. The directed dependency graph between repositories defines a vector field v encoding the
dominant directions of epistemic flow — the typical trajectories along which new configurations
are built from existing ones. The scalar field Φ encodes the density of viable configurations in the
neighborhood of each point. Forking, dependency resolution, and integration correspond to the
constraint-satisfaction dynamics that define admissible trajectories through this space.
The entropy field S tracks the irreversible accumulation of committed architectural decisions.
Every dependency added, every interface stabilized, every API version frozen represents a Sphere-
pop event: an irreversible constraint that narrows the option-space of future configurations.
Applied to repositories, this means that a codebase is not merely its current state but the trajectory
of irreversible decisions that generated it. The full Spherepop normal form records what the
snapshot of current state obscures.
The lamphron-lamphrodyne duality applies here with particular clarity. Lamphron designates
the differentiation pressure: the tendency for systems to generate localized structure, form stable
memory configurations, and specialize toward predictive specificity. In the GitHub context,
lamphron manifests as the pressure toward modularity and the development of increasingly spe-
cialized repositories that solve narrow problems with high precision. Lamphrodyne designates the
integration pressure: the tendency for locally specialized structures to be recombined into higher-
order composites. In the GitHub context, lamphrodyne manifests as dependency aggregation,
framework construction, and the assembly of complex systems from modular components.
The intelligence explosion as a whole can be understood as the product of a lamphron-
lamphrodyne feedback loop operating at planetary scale: specialized repositories accumulate,
creating the conditions for their own integration into increasingly capable composite systems,
whose deployment creates new problems that generate new specialized components, in a cycle
of recursive structural elaboration that mirrors the cosmological process by which gravitational
differentiation produces increasingly complex relational structure. This is precisely the dynamic
that Barbour's entaxy framework tracks in the physical domain [2]: the universe moves away
from the Janus Point not into disorder but into increasing relational specificity. The GitHub
34

ecosystem enacts an analogous process in the domain of executable cognition.
The role of generative AI in this picture is precise: it functions as an entropy-compressing
interface that reduces the navigational cost of traversing the configuration space. Without such an
interface, the density of the repository graph eventually exceeds the capacity of unaided human
search to exploit it efficiently. Language models trained on the graph can compress its structure
into lower-dimensional representations that are easier to query, recombine, and extend. This is
not a qualitative transformation of the underlying dynamics; it is a reduction in the effective
friction coefficient governing traversal of an already-existing admissibility geometry.
The connection to the Yarncrawler framework reinforces this interpretation. Yarncrawler
treats world-state reconstruction as a Wasserstein gradient flow over constraint-satisfying configu-
rations: the goal state defines a target in the space of executable structures, and the reconstruction
process is the gradient descent that drives the system toward it. Repository discovery and inte-
gration can be modeled as exactly this kind of flow. The developer's intended architecture defines
a target configuration; the process of finding, evaluating, forking, and adapting repositories is
the gradient descent that drives the working codebase toward that target. Generative AI makes
the gradient more legible — it compresses the search space and reduces the cost of evaluating
candidate configurations — but it does not modify the underlying geometry of admissibility that
defines which configurations are reachable.
RSVP Field Equations Applied to the Repository Graph
The RSVP triple (Φ, v, S) on the repository configuration space M satisfies:
□Φ + ∇vΦ = −λSΦ,
(3)
∇vv + ∇Φ = −κv,
(4)
∂tS + ∇· (Sv) = σ∥∇Φ∥2.
(5)
Proposition 17.1 (Entropy Monotonicity Along Admissible Trajectories). Let γ : [0, T] →M be
an admissible trajectory (i.e., Φ(γ(t)) > 0 for all t). Then S(γ(t)) is non-decreasing, and strictly
increasing whenever ∥∇Φ(γ(t))∥2 > 0.
Proof. Along γ, equation (5) gives d
dtS(γ(t)) = σ∥∇Φ(γ(t))∥2 ≥0 since σ > 0. Strict positivity
holds whenever ∇Φ ̸= 0 at the trajectory point.
Applied to the repository graph, Proposition 17.1 states that the entropy of irreversible
architectural commitments is non-decreasing along any valid development trajectory. Every
design decision that moves the codebase further into the admissible region Φ > 0 increases S,
recording an irreversible narrowing of the future option-space. This is not a deficiency of the
system; it is the mechanism by which semantic identity becomes stable.
35

Corollary 17.2 (Developmental Irreversibility). A well-formed repository cannot be reverted to a
semantically neutral state without destroying its developmental identity. The entropy S accumulated
along its trajectory records the irreversible commitment structure that constitutes its Spherepop
normal form.
18
Objections and Clarifications
A thesis of this scope invites principled objection. We address the most consequential challenges
directly, in each case arguing that the objection, properly understood, either strengthens or further
specifies the central claim rather than undermining it.
Is this merely collective intelligence?
The collective intelligence literature [9] describes
how groups of agents produce outcomes exceeding individual capacity. The GitHub thesis is
structurally different in two respects. First, collective intelligence typically requires agents
to coordinate in real time, whereas GitHub coordinates asynchronously across decades: the
developer who forks a 2009 repository in 2024 is coordinating with contributors who are no
longer active. Second, collective intelligence produces emergent outputs but rarely externalizes the
intermediate cognitive states that generated them. GitHub's distinctive contribution is precisely
the preservation of developmental geometry — the trajectory, not only the destination. The thesis
is therefore not that many people working together are smart, but that GitHub changed the
ontology of what gets preserved when they do.
Why GitHub specifically rather than the internet generally?
The internet created global
information access. GitHub created globally recomposable executable structure. The distinction
is the difference between reading a description of a machine and having access to the machine's
blueprints in a format that allows direct modification, extension, and integration with other
machines. Stack Overflow [16] preserves isolated code fragments in natural-language context.
ArXiv preserves finished formal artifacts. Neither preserves the developmental trajectory of a
system — the sequence of commits, the issue discussions, the failed branches, the dependency
migrations. Only a version-controlled repository with public history does this, and GitHub's
structural innovations (forking, pull requests, issue tracking, dependency graphs) made this
preservation compositional and globally reachable.
Does closed-source development undermine the thesis?
Closed development does not
falsify the thesis; it quantifies the cost of its absence. The counterfactual is instructive: a world in
which all development remained proprietary would have produced model capabilities far below
the current state, because the training corpus would lack the procedural reasoning substrate that
36

open repositories provide. The thesis predicts not that all intelligence explosion requires open
source, but that the observed acceleration is explained by the fraction of global development that
became publicly recomposable. Closed development contributes zero to A(D) while consuming
resources from the shared ecosystem, which is precisely why firms that selectively open-source
gain disproportionate community returns.
Could earlier scientific traditions have produced similar effects?
Preprint culture, open
journals, and reproducible research movements all moved in the direction of this thesis but fell
short for a specific structural reason: they preserved descriptions of procedures rather than the
procedures themselves. A preprint describing a training algorithm is not the same as a public
repository containing the training code, the data loading pipeline, the evaluation harness, and the
issue thread debating the correctness of a preprocessing step. The latter preserves developmental
geometry in executable form. The former preserves a prose projection of it, from which the
original trajectory cannot be recovered without substantial independent reconstruction. GitHub
closed this gap; no prior system did so at scale.
Is the argument anthropomorphizing repositories?
The RSVP framework uses language
— attractors, mortality, coherence, governance — that may seem to impute agency to static files.
This is a notational convenience, not a metaphysical commitment. The claim is structural: a
repository that encodes parity-preserving bubble logic, majority-vote stabilization, and a two-
stage lamphron-to-lamphrodyne development history exposes richer developmental geometry
than a repository that does not, in the same way that a crystal with specific lattice geometry
encodes more recoverable structure than amorphous glass. No agency is implied; only recoverable
architectural information.
On dark repositories and AI-generated codebases.
A significant open problem deserves
explicit acknowledgment. The recursion identified in equations (1) and (2) implies that as Mt
becomes sufficiently capable, it begins generating Gt+1 faster than human contributors can
evaluate it. This creates the possibility of what we might call dark repositories: codebases
generated by language models for consumption by other language models, forming a coherence
field that maintains admissibility within G while becoming progressively opaque to human
developmental reconstruction. The lamphron-lamphrodyne duality does not require human
observers to function; it requires only that nucleation and integration dynamics operate over
a graph with sufficient admissibility structure. Whether AI-generated lamphron repositories
constitute genuine developmental geometry — whether they possess recoverable trajectories in
the sense required by Theorem 15.2 — or whether they produce admissible but developmentally
hollow artifacts is an empirical question that current tooling cannot yet answer. It is one of the
37

most important open questions raised by the framework.
19
Conclusion: Thought as Recursively Reusable Infrastructure
The intelligence explosion is not primarily artificial intelligence becoming intelligent. It is
humanity converting thought itself into recursively reusable public machinery, and then training
pattern synthesizers to navigate that machinery faster.
GitHub transformed knowledge from static publication into evolutionary infrastructure. It
externalizes cognitive debris rather than discarding it. It rewards incompleteness in ways that
previous institutional structures punished. It aligns the incentive structures of academia, industry,
and independent research toward a common outcome that no centralized institution could have
planned: the continuous public disclosure of intermediate cognitive states at planetary scale.
Generative AI is real, and its capabilities are genuinely significant. But it is an accelerant
layered over a substrate, not the substrate itself. The substrate is the open-source graph: globally
persistent, recursively recomposable, executable, and continuously growing. Remove the substrate
and the accelerant has little to accelerate over. Remove the accelerant and the substrate continues
to grow, as it did for more than a decade before large language models were publicly deployed.
In RSVP terms, GitHub created the admissibility geometry. Generative AI reduced the cost
of navigating it. The explosion lives in the coupling between these two systems — in the closed
recursion loop that now connects model output to repository generation to training data to
model improvement. That loop did not close when GPT appeared. It began closing when the first
pull request was merged into a publicly accessible repository and the first developer on another
continent forked it the same day.
GitHub transformed civilization into a globally replayable semantic field. Generative AI
emerged as a navigational dynamics over that field. The true invention was globally persistent
recomposable thought, and GitHub operationalized it before the models arrived to compress it.
The civilizational discontinuity.
Framed at the largest scale, the argument identifies a gen-
uine historical discontinuity: a transition in what civilizations preserve. Prior to version control,
the record of human technical cognition consisted almost entirely of finalized symbolic outputs —
publications, products, patents, monographs. The developmental process that generated those
outputs was not recorded; it was discarded as ephemera. What survived was the destination,
not the trajectory. GitHub changed this. For the first time in human history, a civilization-scale
system now preserves not only what was built but how it was built: the reasoning, the failures,
the alternatives considered, the bugs encountered and repaired, the partial implementations aban-
doned, the architectural pivots made under constraint. This is not an incremental improvement in
archival fidelity. It is a categorical change in the ontology of what counts as preserved knowledge.
38

The intelligence explosion is therefore a second-order effect of this civilizational transition.
Generative systems trained on the GitHub corpus do not merely learn to write code. They learn
to navigate a preserved record of human developmental cognition at planetary scale — a record
that no prior civilization produced or could have produced. The capability growth associated with
modern AI systems is, in this sense, less a property of the models themselves than a property of
the unprecedented substrate they have been given access to.
Open problems.
The framework developed here raises several questions that the current
formalism does not resolve. The most pressing concerns the transition identified in the objections
section: as AI-assisted generation accelerates Gt+1, the ratio of human-generated to model-
generated developmental geometry in the training corpus will shift. Whether this transition
preserves or degrades admissibility density — whether AI-generated commits constitute genuine
developmental trajectories or developmentally hollow admissible artifacts — is empirically unde-
termined and theoretically urgent. A second open problem concerns the formalization of A(R)
beyond the proportionality established here: a computable admissibility metric would enable
direct corpus filtering and quality assessment at scale. A third concerns the extension of the
Kuramoto synchronization analysis to directed dependency graphs with heterogeneous coupling
strengths, which better model real ecosystem topology than the complete-graph approximation
used in §16. These are the problems on which the framework must be tested if it is to transition
from a theoretical architecture into a predictive science of collective technical cognition.
Notation Glossary
The following symbols appear throughout the main text and appendices. Where a symbol carries
both a general mathematical meaning and a specific interpretation in the GitHub or Spherepop
context, both are given.
39

Symbol
Meaning
Gt
Repository graph at time t; nodes are repositories, directed
edges are dependency or derivation relations
Mt
Language model at time t, trained on the corpus of Gt
Σt
Joint state (Gt, Mt) of the coupled dynamical system
ρ(Ri, Rj)
Recombination friction between repositories Ri and Rj; ex-
pected developer effort to integrate Rj into a codebase de-
pending on Ri
A(R)
Admissibility score of repository R; proportional to recover-
able semantic structure divided by perturbation magnitude
Φ
RSVP scalar field encoding density of constraint-satisfying
configurations; Φ > 0 in admissible regions
Z(Φ)
Zero-set {p ∈M : Φ(p) = 0}; the constraint boundary
separating admissible from inadmissible states
v
RSVP vector field encoding directed flow through configura-
tion space; interpreted as dominant directions of epistemic
development
S
RSVP entropy field tracking irreversible accumulation of struc-
tural commitment; non-decreasing along admissible trajecto-
ries
Bk = (ck, rk, πk)
Spherepop bubble: center ck ∈Z, radius rk ∈N, parity class
πk ∈{0, 1}
Ωk
Support region of bubble Bk: all tape cells within radius rk of
center ck having parity πk
E(Bk)
Bubble energy P
i∈Ωk |si|; measures semantic persistence
C(Bk)
Signed coherence P
i∈Ωk si; positive for constructive, nega-
tive for destructive, zero for decoherent bubbles
Rλ
Stabilization (reinforcement) operator with governance coeffi-
cient λ > 0; drives bubble cells toward the sign of C(Bk)
M(t)
Global mortality functional P
k
d
dtE(Bk); negative in expec-
tation without stabilization
σn
State after n replay steps; a random variable distributed ac-
cording to Pn
Pn
Distribution over semantic states after n replay operations;
converges weakly to P∞for Tier 1 repositories
µ(Ba, Bb)
Merge coherence P
i∈Ωa∩Ωb s(a)
i s(b)
i ; positive for constructive
merges
πk(s)
Coarse-graining map from tape state s to bubble coherence
vector at scale k; defines the semantic renormalization group
Ψi
Complex amplitude rieiθi in the Quantum SpherePop lattice;
amplitude encodes entropic magnitude, phase encodes coher-
ence
40

A
Probabilistic Tape Geometry
Let the substrate tape be indexed by the integers Z. Each tape cell carries an integer-valued
stochastic state si(t) ∈Z for tape coordinate i and discrete interpreter time t. The substrate state
is therefore a field:
S(t) = {si(t)}i∈Z.
Unlike ordinary Brainfuck, transition operators are nondeterministic. The arithmetic operator
induces a symmetric random walk:
si(t + 1) = si(t) + ξt,
ξt ∈{−1, +1},
Pr(ξt = +1) = Pr(ξt = −1) = 1
2.
Likewise, pointer motion is stochastic:
p(t + 1) = p(t) + ηt,
ηt ∈{−1, +1}.
Thus the substrate is not a deterministic memory system but a coupled stochastic field.
B
Bubble Regions
A Spherepop bubble is not represented by a single tape cell but by a finite parity-preserving
neighborhood. Define a bubble Bk as a triple:
Bk = (ck, rk, πk)
where ck is the center, rk is the radius, and πk ∈{0, 1} is the parity class. The support region is:
Ωk =

i ∈Z : |i −ck| ≤rk and i ≡πk
(mod 2)
	
.
Parity structure is important because parity remains one of the few stable geometric invariants
under noisy drift, as established by Lemma 7.1 in §7.
C
Bubble Energy and Coherence
Define the local bubble energy:
E(Bk) =
X
i∈Ωk
|si|.
41

This measures semantic persistence. Define the signed coherence:
C(Bk) =
X
i∈Ωk
si.
Interpretation: C > 0 denotes constructive coherence; C < 0 denotes destructive coherence;
C = 0 denotes decoherence. A semantic bubble exists only while E(Bk) > ε for some stability
threshold ε > 0.
D
Mortality Functional
Define global mortality:
M(t) =
X
k
d
dtE(Bk).
Without stabilization, E[M(t)] < 0.
Theorem D.1 (Bubble Mortality). Let S(t) evolve solely under unbiased substrate dynamics. Then:
lim
t→∞Pr
 E(Bk) = 0

= 1.
Proof sketch. The bubble support undergoes coupled symmetric random walks. Since no restoring
force exists, finite local coherence dissipates under recurrence and cancellation. More precisely, the
process E(Bk)(t) is a non-negative supermartingale (under unbiased dynamics, E[E(Bk)(t+1) |
Ft] ≤E(Bk)(t)) bounded below by zero. By the martingale convergence theorem it converges
almost surely to a limit L ≥0; since the random walk on Z is recurrent, the limit must be L = 0
almost surely.
E
Stabilization Operators
Define a reinforcement operator Rλ : S →S acting locally by:
si 7→si + λ sign(C(Bk)).
This introduces directional correction against substrate entropy. The stabilized dynamics become:
si(t + 1) = si(t) + ξt + λ sign(C(Bk)),
where λ > 0 is the semantic governance coefficient. For λ >
√
2 the drift term dominates the
noise variance, guaranteeing E[E(Bk)(t + 1) | Ft] > E(Bk)(t) whenever C(Bk)(t) ̸= 0.
42

F
Merge Dynamics
Let two bubbles overlap: Ωa ∩Ωb ̸= ∅. Define merge coherence:
µ(Ba, Bb) =
X
i∈Ωa∩Ωb
s(a)
i
s(b)
i .
If µ(Ba, Bb) > 0 the merge is constructive. If µ(Ba, Bb) < 0 the merge is destructive and induces
collapse radiation:
∆E = −α|µ|.
This corresponds to the Spherepop Calculus merge operator interpreted geometrically over a
mortal substrate.
G
Semantic Replay
Define a semantic replay sequence P = (e1, e2, . . . , en) with replay operator:
σn = en ◦en−1 ◦· · · ◦e1(σ0).
Over a stochastic substrate the replay is itself stochastic, generating a distribution over semantic
states:
σn ∼Pn.
Meaning is therefore not a single state but an attractor distribution. The convergence of {Pn} is
guaranteed for Tier 1 repositories by Theorem 15.2.
H
Attractor Semantics
Define the replay expectation ¯σn = E[σn]. A semantic object O is stable if and only if:
lim
n→∞Var(On) < δ
for some tolerance δ > 0. Semantic persistence is therefore not exact symbolic preservation
but bounded variance under replay. A repository's contribution to the collective substrate is
proportional to the recoverability of its semantic attractor under perturbation:
A(R) ∝recoverable semantic structure
perturbation magnitude
.
43

I
Spherepop-/æmbiːɛf/ Correspondence
Spherepop concept
Substrate interpretation
Sphere
Local parity-preserving field
Pop
Entropic collapse event
Merge
Coherence synchronization
Choice
Stochastic branch distribution
Collapse
Representative normalization
Replay
Attractor regeneration
Semantic object
Persistent metastable region
Computation
Guided entropy navigation
The resulting interpretation reframes /æmbiːɛf/ from an esolang curiosity into a minimal ther-
modynamic semantics for mortal computation. Ordinary languages encourage exact addressing,
exact arithmetic, and exact control flow. /æmbiːɛf/ destroys all three, so higher-order structure
must emerge relationally — making it oddly compatible with RSVP-style field thinking, semantic
manifolds, topological cognition, and distributed attractor systems, and making the Spherepop
layer above it not an awkward workaround but a natural consequence of the substrate's geometry.
References
[1] Barabási, Albert-László. Linked: The New Science of Networks. Cambridge, MA: Perseus
Publishing, 2002.
[2] Barbour, Julian, Tim Koslowski, and Flavio Mercati. The Janus Point: A New Theory of Time.
New York: Basic Books, 2020.
[3] Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and
Freedom. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006.
[4] Brooks, Frederick P. The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software Engineering. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1975.
[5] Cover, Thomas M., and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory. 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley-Interscience, 2006.
[6] Fogel, David B. Evolutionary Computation: Toward a New Philosophy of Machine Intelligence.
Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press, 1995.
44

[7] Hamano, Junio C., and Linus Torvalds. Git Source Code Management System. 2005. https:
//git-scm.com
[8] Goodfellow, Ian, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2016.
[9] Holland, John H. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1992.
[10] Lamport, Leslie. "Time, Clocks, and the Ordering of Events in a Distributed System." Com-
munications of the ACM 21, no. 7 (1978): 558-565.
[11] Kuramoto, Yoshiki. Chemical Oscillations, Waves, and Turbulence. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
1984.
[12] Lakatos, Imre. Proofs and Refutations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976.
[13] Lessig, Lawrence. The Future of Ideas. New York: Random House, 2001.
[14] von Neumann, John. "Probabilistic Logics and the Synthesis of Reliable Organisms from
Unreliable Components." In Automata Studies, edited by Claude Shannon and John McCarthy,
43-98. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1956.
[15] Ostrom, Elinor. Governing the Commons. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[16] Raymond, Eric S. The Cathedral and the Bazaar. Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media, 1999.
[17] Russell, Stuart, and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. 3rd ed. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2010.
[18] Shannon, Claude E. "A Mathematical Theory of Communication." Bell System Technical
Journal 27, no. 3 (1948): 379-423.
[19] Simon, Herbert A. "The Architecture of Complexity." Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society 106, no. 6 (1962): 467-482.
[20] Stallman, Richard M. Free Software, Free Society. Boston: GNU Press, 2002.
[21] Torvalds, Linus, and David Diamond. Just for Fun: The Story of an Accidental Revolutionary.
New York: HarperBusiness, 2001.
[22] Turing, Alan M. "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsprob-
lem." Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society 42, no. 2 (1936): 230-265.
45

[23] Vaswani, Ashish, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. "Attention Is All You Need." In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 30, 5998-6008. 2017.
[24] Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1948.
[25] Wolfram, Stephen. A New Kind of Science. Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media, 2002.
46

