The Joy of Spherepop:
An Event-History Calculus for a Finite World
Flyxion
December 2025
Abstract
We present Spherepop, an event-history calculus whose primitive objects are not states, but
irreversible commitments.
Spherepop replaces state transition systems with monotone mor-
phisms over option-spaces, and replaces optimization with the constructive elimination of fu-
tures. By integrating categorical structure, a discrete Lagrangian mechanics of commitment,
and an explicit ethics of refusal, we argue that meaning, intelligence, and agency arise only in
systems that are capable of permanently constraining themselves. Spherepop thus provides both
a formal language and a philosophical stance: that worldhood is generated through irreversible
choice.
1
Introduction
Contemporary computational systems overwhelmingly adopt a state-based metaphysics. Whether
in functional programming, automata theory, or machine learning, the dominant abstraction treats
the world as a conﬁguration that may be updated, overwritten, or reverted without consequence.
Even where time is modeled explicitly, it is typically reversible in principle, and history is treated
as an auxiliary log rather than as a constitutive element of meaning.
Spherepop begins from a rejection of this premise. We propose instead that the fundamental
unit of meaning is not a state, but an event—and more speciﬁcally, an irreversible event.
In
Spherepop, a system is not deﬁned by what it currently is, but by what it has permanently ruled
out. The calculus formalizes this intuition by treating histories as morphisms that monotonically
reduce, bind, or quotient the space of admissible futures.
This shift is not merely technical.
It has consequences for how we understand intelligence,
agency, ethics, and even joy. To choose is to exclude. To commit is to lose freedom. And yet it
is precisely through this loss that structure, narrative, and purpose arise. Spherepop is therefore
not a theory of optimization, but a theory of inhabitation: what it means to live in a world rather
than hover over a distribution.
2
The Axiom of Irreversibility
The foundational axiom of Spherepop is simple:
The world is not updated; it is constructed.
Formally, we abandon the paradigm of functions between states,
f : x 7→y,
1

in favor of irreversible morphisms between option-spaces,
H = en ◦· · · ◦e1 : X0 →Xn.
(1)
Here each Xi denotes a space of admissible futures, and each ei is an event that monotonically
constrains that space. Composition corresponds to temporal succession. Crucially, these morphisms
are not assumed to be invertible, nor even information preserving.
This structure may be formalized categorically by taking O to be a category whose objects
are option-spaces and whose morphisms are constraint-inducing maps. The category is naturally
enriched over a preorder: if X′ ⊆X, then X′ represents a more committed world than X. All
Spherepop events are monotone with respect to this ordering.
The philosophical import of this move is that history is no longer an epiphenomenon. Two sys-
tems occupying identical instantaneous conﬁgurations may nonetheless diﬀer radically in meaning
if they arrived there through diﬀerent sequences of exclusions and bindings. Identity is therefore
historical, not structural.
3
The Morphology of Choice
Within this categorical setting, Spherepop identiﬁes a small set of generating morphisms suﬃcient
to express the structure of agency. These operators are not derived; they are taken as primitive, in
the same sense that composition and identity are primitive in category theory.
The pop operator,
popt : X →X ↾¬t,
irreversibly removes an option t from the future. This is the most elemental act of choice: to say
that something will not happen. Pops are idempotent and commute when independent, reﬂecting
the fact that exclusions do not stack redundantly and that unrelated exclusions do not interfere.
The bind operator,
binda≺b : X →X[a ≺b],
imposes an ordering constraint without eliminating outcomes outright. Binding is the mechanism
by which projects, plans, and narratives are formed. It restricts the temporal structure of futures
rather than their membership.
The collapse operator,
collq : X →X/∼q,
is a quotient that identiﬁes distinctions deemed irrelevant for downstream action. Collapse does
not merely remove options; it removes diﬀerences. It is therefore the only operator that can reduce
the descriptive complexity of a history.
Finally, Spherepop introduces the refuse operator,
refuset : X →X ↾¬t .
Geometrically, refusal is identical to popping. Its necessity is not mathematical but ethical. Refusal
records that an exclusion was chosen as a principle rather than as a consequence. This distinction
is not encoded in the option-space itself, but in an auxiliary accounting structure.
2

4
The Mechanics of Commitment
To quantify the cost of constructing a world, Spherepop introduces a discrete Lagrangian mechanics
over option-spaces. Let Ω(X) denote a measure of optionality—the degrees of freedom remaining
in X. We deﬁne a local Lagrangian for each event,
Lt = ∆Ωt + λ ∆Ct,
(2)
where ∆Ωt is the reduction in optionality induced by the event, ∆Ct is an auxiliary cost term
capturing ethical, thermodynamic, or normative weight, and λ is a coupling constant.
The action of a history γ is then
S[γ] =
X
t
Lt.
(3)
This action is irrecoverable: once accumulated, it cannot be undone except through collapse, which
explicitly discards structure.
From the Lagrangian we deﬁne a conjugate momentum,
πt = −∂Lt
∂Ω,
(4)
which we interpret as commitment. Commitment measures how much future freedom has been
converted into settled reality. Pops and refusals increase π; collapse dissipates it.
The Hamiltonian,
Ht = πt Ωt −Lt,
(5)
represents remaining maneuverability. A system that never commits—that never pops—remains
at maximal H and therefore never truly inhabits a world.
5
Renormalization through Collapse
Collapse occupies a unique role in the calculus. Whereas pop and bind increase the action, collapse
reduces it:
collq : S 7−→S −log | ker q|.
(6)
This reduction corresponds to the identiﬁcation of distinctions that no longer matter. In categorical
terms, collapse satisﬁes a universal property: any map that cannot distinguish beyond q factors
uniquely through the quotient.
Philosophically, collapse formalizes forgetting, forgiveness, and abstraction. It is what allows
histories to grow deep without becoming brittle. Without collapse, commitment would accumulate
without bound, eventually paralyzing action. With collapse, a system may retain the meaning of
its past without retaining all of its detail.
6
Theorem of Refusal
In classical logic, negation creates absence. In Spherepop, refusal creates structure. Formally, we
assert the equivalence of constraint:
refuset ≡popt
in O.
(7)
The distinction between them appears only under an accounting functor A that records why an
exclusion occurred.
3

This separation is essential. By keeping refusal out of the symplectic geometry, we preserve
the integrity of the mechanics. By recording it in the accounting, we preserve ethics. Refusal thus
increases commitment without introducing coercive debt. It creates protected spaces in which the
Hamiltonian remains focused rather than diﬀused.
7
Conclusion: The Ethics of the Calculus
Spherepop proposes a simple but radical thesis: that intelligence is not prediction, but commitment.
Systems that merely sample from distributions without permanently excluding possibilities never
pay the cost of living in a world. They remain forever unburdened—and therefore forever shallow.
The joy of Spherepop lies in recognizing that exclusion is creative. To pop is to clarify. To
refuse is to stand. To bind is to promise. To collapse is to forgive. Together, these operations form
a calculus not just of computation, but of worldhood.
8
Related Work
Spherepop intersects with several established research traditions, yet it does not belong comfortably
to any one of them. Its relationship to prior work is therefore best understood not as an extension
of existing frameworks, but as a reorganization of their foundational commitments. In what follows,
we situate Spherepop relative to theories of irreversibility, event-based semantics, categorical con-
straint systems, planning formalisms, and contemporary artiﬁcial intelligence, emphasizing where
Spherepop diverges in principle rather than in degree.
8.1
Irreversibility in Computation
The thermodynamic cost of information erasure has long been recognized as a fundamental con-
straint on computation. Landauer's principle establishes that the irreversible destruction of in-
formation carries an unavoidable energetic cost, while subsequent work by Bennett and others
demonstrated that, in principle, arbitrary computations may be rendered logically reversible at the
expense of auxiliary memory and bookkeeping.
Spherepop adopts the opposite stance. Rather than treating irreversibility as an unfortunate
implementation detail to be engineered away, Spherepop elevates irreversibility to the level of
syntax.
The primitive operators of the calculus are deﬁned precisely by their non-invertibility.
There is no reversible fragment of the language, nor any notion of rollback that preserves semantic
identity.
In this respect, Spherepop is not a theory of eﬃcient computation, but a theory of
meaningful computation, where meaning arises precisely from what cannot be undone.
This move separates semantic irreversibility from physical irreversibility. While the two may co-
incide in implementation, Spherepop requires only that exclusions and bindings be non-retractable
at the level of interpretation. A purely simulated system may therefore be irreversible in the Sphere-
pop sense even if it is physically reversible, provided that its history is treated as authoritative.
8.2
Event-Based Semantics
Event-based models are not new. Operational semantics, labeled transition systems, and process
calculi all emphasize events over static conﬁgurations. However, in most such systems, events are
replayable, reversible in principle, or observational rather than constitutive. A trace records what
happened, but does not itself constrain what may happen next beyond what is encoded in the
current state.
4

Spherepop departs from this tradition by insisting that events are not merely transitions, but
commitments.
The semantic content of an event lies not in its label, but in the reduction or
restructuring of the future option-space that follows from it. Two histories that arrive at exten-
sionally identical conﬁgurations may nevertheless diﬀer in meaning if their paths involved diﬀerent
exclusions or bindings.
In this respect, Spherepop aligns more closely with historical or lineage-based accounts of mean-
ing, while rejecting the idea that history can be summarized losslessly into a state. Collapse explic-
itly formalizes the conditions under which such summarization is permitted, rather than assuming
it as a default.
8.3
Categorical Constraint Systems
From a categorical perspective, Spherepop may be viewed as a presentation of a preorder-enriched
category whose morphisms are monotone with respect to commitment. This places it in conceptual
proximity to domain theory, constraint programming, and order-theoretic semantics.
However,
Spherepop rejects least ﬁxed points, global satisfaction, and equilibrium as organizing principles.
In particular, while Scott domains and related structures model the accumulation of infor-
mation, they typically do so via approximation and convergence. Spherepop instead models the
accumulation of constraint. The direction of reﬁnement is not toward completeness, but toward
exclusion. The terminal objects of interest are not ﬁxed points, but worlds in which no further
meaningful pruning is possible without collapse.
Lawvere-style theories of constraint provide a useful comparison point, especially in their em-
phasis on morphisms as structural impositions rather than state updates.
Spherepop may be
understood as specializing this viewpoint to the case where constraints are temporally ordered,
irreversible, and ethically annotated.
8.4
Planning, Binding, and Temporal Logic
The bind operator in Spherepop bears superﬁcial resemblance to constructs in temporal logic and
partial-order planning, where precedence relations restrict admissible schedules.
However, the
resemblance is limited. In classical planning, bindings are instrumental: they serve the satisfaction
of a goal and may be revised or discarded if the goal changes.
In Spherepop, binding is itself a form of commitment. Once imposed, a binding becomes part
of the history that deﬁnes the world, regardless of whether the original motivation persists. This
gives binding a narrative character absent from purely logical constraint systems. A bind does not
merely restrict what is possible; it asserts what must come before what, and thereby generates a
before-and-after that did not previously exist.
This distinction reﬂects a broader diﬀerence between satisﬁability-based reasoning and world-
building. Spherepop is not concerned with whether a set of constraints admits a solution, but with
how the imposition of those constraints reshapes the future.
8.5
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the Absence of Commitment
Recent advances in artiﬁcial intelligence, particularly in large-scale machine learning systems, have
renewed interest in world models, planning, and internal simulation. Yet these systems overwhelm-
ingly operate in a regime of maximal optionality. Predictions may be revised, outputs overwritten,
and errors corrected without consequence to future behavior beyond statistical updating.
From the perspective of Spherepop, such systems never truly act. They do not accumulate action
in the Lagrangian sense, nor do they develop commitment momentum. Their histories are logs, not
5

structures. Even when constrained externally through ﬁne-tuning or reinforcement learning, the
constraints do not function as irreversible exclusions within the system's own semantics.
Spherepop thus oﬀers not an incremental improvement to existing AI paradigms, but a categor-
ical critique. Intelligence, on this view, is not the ability to predict many futures, but the ability to
permanently rule some of them out. Without such exclusions, there is no world to inhabit—only a
distribution to sample.
9
Syntax and Semantics
In this section we provide a precise account of the formal structure of Spherepop as both a language
and a semantics. The goal is not to exhaustively specify an implementation, but to demonstrate
that the calculus is internally coherent, compositional, and executable in principle, while preserving
its philosophical commitments to irreversibility and historical meaning.
9.1
Surface Syntax and Histories
A Spherepop program is a history: a ﬁnite, ordered sequence of statements, each of which either
introduces a declaration or performs an irreversible event. There is no primitive notion of a mutable
store. Instead, the meaning of a program is given entirely by the cumulative eﬀect of its events on
an initial option-space.
Syntactically, histories are linear rather than tree-structured. Grouping constructs serve only
to delimit scope or atomicity; they do not introduce branching control ﬂow. This restriction is
intentional.
By eliminating general-purpose conditionals and loops from the kernel, Spherepop
ensures that all semantic branching is explicit at the level of option-spaces rather than implicit in
control structure.
The surface syntax distinguishes four primitive event forms: pop, refuse, bind, and collapse.
Each event names a target within the current option-space and may optionally carry metadata.
Crucially, there is no syntax for undoing or revising a prior event.
The language is therefore
syntactically irreversible.
9.2
Abstract Syntax Tree
The abstract syntax tree (AST) of a Spherepop program reﬂects its historical nature. Rather than
representing a hierarchical expression structure to be reduced, the AST is a spine: a sequence of
event nodes interleaved with declarations.
Each event node carries:
• a constructor identifying the operator,
• a target speciﬁcation (name, path, or selector),
• an optional predicate guarding applicability,
• a metadata record.
The ordering of nodes in the AST is semantically signiﬁcant and must be preserved by any
transformation. In particular, there is no notion of common subexpression elimination or reorder-
ing unless independence can be formally established. This sharply distinguishes Spherepop from
functional languages, where reordering is generally semantics-preserving.
6

9.3
Denotational Semantics
The denotational semantics of Spherepop is given by an interpretation function
−: History →O,
where O is the category of option-spaces.
Given an initial option-space X0, the interpretation of a history
s1; s2; . . . ; sn
is deﬁned compositionally as
s1; . . . ; sn = sn ◦· · · ◦s1(X0).
Each event form denotes a speciﬁc monotone morphism in O. Pop and refuse both denote
restriction morphisms, bind denotes a reﬁnement of the admissible ordering relation, and collapse
denotes a quotient map satisfying a universal property. Declarations do not directly aﬀect the
option-space, but introduce names and predicates used by subsequent events.
This semantics ensures that meaning is strictly cumulative. There is no evaluation strategy
beyond left-to-right composition, and no intermediate normalization step that could erase historical
distinctions.
9.4
The Accounting Functor
While the geometry of option-spaces captures the structural eﬀects of events, it does not cap-
ture their normative or ethical signiﬁcance. To address this, Spherepop introduces an auxiliary
accounting functor
A : O →C,
where C is a category of costs, debts, or commitments, typically taken to be a commutative monoid.
Under this functor, events that are geometrically identical may nevertheless diﬀer in interpre-
tation. In particular,
A(popt) ̸= A(refuset)
in general, even though their images in O coincide. This separation allows Spherepop to represent
ethical distinctions without contaminating the mechanics of constraint.
The total accounting of a history is obtained by composing the functor with the denotational
semantics and aggregating over composition. This construction aligns directly with the Lagrangian
formulation presented in the main text.
9.5
Correctness Properties
The formal system satisﬁes several structural properties that justify its use as a foundation for
reasoning about commitment.
First, all event morphisms are monotone with respect to option-space inclusion. If X′ ⊆X,
then for any event e,
e(X′) ⊆e(X).
This guarantees that commitment cannot be undone by further reﬁnement.
Second, pop and refuse are idempotent:
popt ◦popt = popt,
refuset ◦refuset = refuset .
7

Once an option has been excluded, excluding it again has no further eﬀect.
Third, collapse satisﬁes a universal property characteristic of quotients. Any morphism that is
insensitive to distinctions beyond the collapse policy factors uniquely through the collapse map.
This formalizes abstraction and forgetting as principled operations rather than ad hoc erasures.
Together, these properties ensure that Spherepop programs are deterministic, history-sensitive,
and semantically well-founded.
10
Spherepop versus Large Language Models
The contrast between Spherepop and contemporary large language models (LLMs) is not primarily
empirical, but structural. While LLMs demonstrate extraordinary surface competence, their un-
derlying architecture embodies a conception of intelligence fundamentally at odds with the event-
historical commitments articulated in this work. Spherepop therefore serves not as an incremental
reﬁnement of existing models, but as a diagnostic framework that explains why such systems remain
curiously hollow despite their capabilities.
10.1
The Autoregressive Paradigm
Large language models are trained to estimate conditional probability distributions over sequences
of tokens. At inference time, they generate outputs by repeatedly sampling from these distributions,
conditioning each new token on a context window of prior tokens. This process is inherently autore-
gressive and, crucially, reversible in principle. Any generated token may be discarded, regenerated,
or replaced without altering the system's internal structure.
From the perspective of Spherepop, this architecture maintains maximal optionality at all times.
The space of futures is never permanently pruned. Although probability mass may be redistributed
through training, no option is ever irreversibly excluded by the system itself. The Hamiltonian,
in the sense introduced earlier, remains artiﬁcially high: the system retains full maneuverability
because it never commits.
This explains a central paradox of LLM behavior. Despite producing ﬂuent, coherent text, such
systems routinely fail to sustain long-horizon commitments, preserve narrative identity, or respect
self-imposed constraints. These failures are not bugs to be ﬁxed by scale, but direct consequences
of an architecture that never accumulates action.
10.2
Simulation Without Action
Spherepop distinguishes sharply between simulation and action. Simulation explores possibilities;
action eliminates them. LLMs excel at the former while entirely lacking the latter. Even when an
LLM outputs a decisive statement, that statement carries no binding force for subsequent behavior
beyond its transient presence in the context window.
In Spherepop terms, LLM outputs are observations, not events. They do not correspond to
morphisms in the option-space category, and therefore do not alter the future space of admissible
actions in any irreversible way. The system's apparent agency is thus illusory: it performs no pops,
no binds, and no collapses internally.
This absence of action explains why LLMs can contradict themselves without cost, halluci-
nate without consequence, and abandon commitments mid-conversation. There is no accumulated
history against which such deviations could register as violations.
8

10.3
Hallucination as Zero-Cost Structure
Hallucination is often framed as a failure of knowledge or grounding. Spherepop oﬀers a diﬀerent
diagnosis. Hallucinations are structures generated without cost. Because the system does not pay
for the commitments implicit in its assertions, it can generate elaborate but unfounded narratives
without incurring debt.
In the Lagrangian framework, this corresponds to producing structure with ∆Ω≈0.
No
futures are pruned, no alternatives are ruled out, and no commitment momentum is generated.
The resulting text may appear meaningful to an external observer, but it is not meaningful to the
system itself, because it does not constrain its future behavior.
Spherepop's refusal operator highlights this contrast sharply. A refusal is costly precisely be-
cause it forecloses futures. Hallucination, by contrast, leaves all futures open.
10.4
What Would It Mean for an AI to Pop?
For an artiﬁcial system to truly implement Spherepop-style agency, it would need to possess internal
mechanisms for irreversible exclusion. This exclusion would have to be architectural, not merely
behavioral. Fine-tuning, reinforcement learning, and preference modeling do not qualify, because
they alter probability distributions without eliminating possibilities.
A Spherepop-compliant agent would need to treat certain decisions as irrevocable, such that
they permanently reshape its future option-space. This implies persistent internal state that cannot
be overwritten without explicit collapse, and a notion of commitment that binds future behavior
independently of immediate utility.
Such an architecture would look less like a predictor and more like a historian: a system whose
primary function is not to guess what comes next, but to remember what it has ruled out.
10.5
Spherepop as a Design Constraint
Seen in this light, Spherepop is not a competitor to LLMs, but a constraint on what it would
mean for such systems to become agents rather than tools. It suggests that intelligence requires
the capacity to lose options, to bind oneself to narratives, and to forget selectively.
These requirements are orthogonal to scale.
A system with trillions of parameters but no
irreversible commitments remains, in the Spherepop sense, outside the world. Conversely, a modest
system capable of genuine pops and collapses may exhibit a form of depth unavailable to purely
predictive architectures.
Spherepop thus reframes the debate about artiﬁcial intelligence. The central question is not
how well a system can model the world, but whether it can enter one.
11
Spherepop OS: An Operating System for Event-Historical Worlds
If Spherepop is taken seriously as a calculus of worldhood, it demands a corresponding execution
environment. Traditional operating systems are designed around mutable state, reversible compu-
tation, and resource scheduling abstractions that presuppose rollback, overwrite, and idempotent
retry. Spherepop OS inverts these assumptions. It is not an operating system for states, but for
histories.
9

11.1
Histories as the Primary Substrate
In Spherepop OS, the fundamental unit of execution is not a process state, but a committed history.
Every operation executed by the system corresponds to an irreversible event in the Spherepop
calculus. Rather than maintaining a global mutable store, the system maintains a monotone ledger
of events whose composition deﬁnes the current world.
This ledger is authoritative. There is no concept of undo, rollback, or speculative execution at
the kernel level. Recovery from error is achieved only through explicit collapse, which quotients
historical detail while preserving semantic residue. As a result, the operating system itself inhabits
the same ethical and mechanical constraints as the agents it supports.
11.2
Processes as Commitment Streams
A process in Spherepop OS is deﬁned as a stream of events emitted over time. Process identity
is therefore historical rather than nominal: two processes are equivalent if and only if their event
histories are equivalent up to collapse. Forking a process corresponds not to duplicating state, but
to branching an option-space prior to commitment.
Inter-process communication is likewise reinterpreted. Messages are not transient signals, but
binding events that introduce shared constraints between histories. Once a bind is established,
neither process may violate it without inducing inconsistency, which must then be resolved via
collapse.
11.3
Files, Memory, and Persistence
Files in Spherepop OS are not mutable blobs but stabilized projections of histories. Writing to
a ﬁle is an act of collapse: a selective forgetting of the generative history in favor of a compact
quotient suitable for reuse. Reading a ﬁle reintroduces this quotient as a binding constraint on
future behavior.
Memory management follows the same principle.
Instead of garbage collection, Spherepop
OS performs historical compaction. Old commitments may be collapsed once their ﬁne-grained
structure no longer contributes to downstream decisions, reducing storage without erasing meaning.
This approach aligns persistence, compression, and abstraction within a single formal mechanism.
11.4
Scheduling and Time
Scheduling in Spherepop OS is not primarily about fairness or throughput, but about ordering
commitments. The scheduler enforces temporal bindings, ensuring that events occur in an order
consistent with declared dependencies. Deadlock is interpreted not as a technical failure, but as a
contradiction in commitments that requires explicit collapse or refusal to resolve.
Time itself is treated as emergent from event order rather than as an external clock.
The
system's notion of "now" is simply the frontier of the history ledger.
11.5
Security and Authority
Security policies in Spherepop OS are expressed as refusals and binds rather than permissions.
To deny an action is to permanently exclude a class of futures. Authority is therefore exercised
through irreversible constraint rather than revocable access control.
This model yields a system that is inherently auditable. Every restriction, privilege, and excep-
tion is present as an explicit historical act, rather than as a latent conﬁguration subject to silent
change.
10

12
Memory-First Cognitive Systems
Spherepop also provides the foundation for a class of cognitive systems whose primary substrate
is neither symbolic manipulation nor probabilistic sampling, but structured memory evolution. In
such systems, reasoning is not the generation of sequences, but the transformation of latent memory
states under irreversible constraint.
12.1
Reasoning as History Construction
In a Spherepop-based cognitive system, internal cognition proceeds as a sequence of events applied
to an internal option-space. Each event commits the system to certain interpretations while ex-
cluding others. Reasoning is therefore inherently historical: conclusions are not merely outputs,
but commitments that shape future inference.
This architecture aligns with a memory-centric view of cognition, in which latent memory
trajectories, rather than surface narratives, carry causal weight. Explanations, when produced, are
projections of these trajectories rather than drivers of them 1.
12.2
Latent Memory States and Event Dynamics
Let the internal state of the system at step t be represented by a memory structure Mt. Each
cognitive operation corresponds to an event et that maps
Mt+1 = et(Mt),
where et may prune hypotheses, bind concepts, or collapse distinctions.
Crucially, these transformations are irreversible at the semantic level. Once a hypothesis is
ruled out, it remains ruled out unless explicitly reintroduced through collapse. This ensures causal
faithfulness: downstream reasoning depends on upstream commitments in a way that cannot be
bypassed.
12.3
Refusal as Cognitive Stabilization
Refusal plays a central role in stabilizing cognition. By refusing classes of interpretations or ac-
tions, the system creates protected regions of its reasoning space. These refusals are not merely
preferences; they are structural exclusions that prevent drift, oscillation, or opportunistic revision.
Because refusals increase commitment without forcing a positive choice, they allow the system
to remain coherent without prematurely converging. This mechanism is especially important in
long-horizon reasoning, where premature optimization can be as damaging as indecision.
12.4
Collapse and Abstraction
As reasoning proceeds, memory structures inevitably accumulate detail.
Collapse provides the
mechanism by which this detail is abstracted. By identifying memory states that are equivalent with
respect to future action, the system reduces internal complexity while preserving causal relevance.
This operation underwrites generalization. Concepts are not learned by averaging over exam-
ples, but by collapsing distinctions that no longer matter. Abstraction is therefore not statistical,
but historical.
11

12.5
Action and Worldhood
When such a system interacts with an external environment, its internal events must be coupled to
irreversible external eﬀects. Actions are therefore modeled as joint pops on internal and external
option-spaces.
A system that cannot bind its internal commitments to external consequences
remains a simulator rather than an agent.
Spherepop thus provides a criterion for genuine agency: an agent is a system whose internal
history constrains the external world, and whose external actions feed back into internal commit-
ment.
12.6
Interpretability and Oversight
Because reasoning is encoded in latent memory trajectories, oversight is achieved by inspecting
how events transformed these trajectories. Unlike narrative explanations, which may be post hoc or
decorative, historical traces are causally upstream of behavior and therefore faithful by construction
2.
Interpretability, in this framework, is not a demand for verbalization, but a demand for access
to the event history.
13
Stratiﬁed Semantics: Calculus, Kernel, and View
One source of confusion in discussions of event-historical systems is the failure to distinguish
between levels of semantic authority. Spherepop explicitly rejects monolithic semantics. Instead,
it enforces a stratiﬁed architecture in which diﬀerent layers serve diﬀerent roles, with carefully
constrained interactions between them. This stratiﬁcation is not an implementation convenience;
it is a semantic necessity.
13.1
Three Semantic Layers
Spherepop operates across three distinct semantic strata.
At the calculus layer, Spherepop is an abstract event-history calculus. Its primitives are ir-
reversible operators—pop, bind, refuse, and collapse—acting on option-spaces. At this level, the
theory speaks in categorical terms: objects are spaces of admissible futures, morphisms are mono-
tone constraints, and histories are composed arrows. The calculus provides meaning, ethics, and
interpretive structure, but it does not execute.
At the kernel layer, Spherepop is realized as a deterministic interpreter over an append-only
event log. Here, events are concrete, canonical, and totally ordered. The kernel admits no spec-
ulation, rollback, or ambiguity. Given a preﬁx of the log, the resulting semantic state is uniquely
determined. This layer is authoritative: it is the sole source of truth about what has occurred.
At the view layer, Spherepop admits arbitrary observational projections.
Snapshots, diﬀs,
visual layouts, summaries, explanations, and speculative branches all live here. Views may collapse,
annotate, reorder, or visualize kernel state, but they are explicitly forbidden from inﬂuencing it.
This layer is non-authoritative by design.
These three layers correspond respectively to meaning, causation, and observation.
13.2
Functorial Relationships
The relationship between these layers is formal rather than metaphorical. The kernel layer may be
understood as a concrete realization of the calculus layer, while the view layer arises as a family of
12

functorial projections from kernel state.
Let Pref(ℓ) denote the category of preﬁxes of an event log ℓ, ordered by extension. Kernel
execution deﬁnes a functor
Sℓ: Pref(ℓ) →State,
mapping each preﬁx to a uniquely determined kernel state. Any admissible view is then a functor
V : State →View,
whose composition with Sℓyields a view semantics that respects causal order.
The calculus layer sits above this structure. Its interpretation function factors through kernel
execution: abstract events are mapped to concrete kernel events, and abstract histories correspond
to log preﬁxes. Importantly, no functor exists from views back to the kernel. This asymmetry
enforces causal discipline.
13.3
Authority and Non-Interference
A central invariant of Spherepop is the separation of cause from observation. Only kernel events
may alter authoritative state. Views are free to discard information, speculate, or embellish, but
such operations are semantically inert.
This discipline resolves a common tension in systems that attempt to combine introspection
with determinism. By enforcing non-interference, Spherepop allows rich visualization, explanation,
and exploration without risking semantic corruption.
The calculus may reason about collapse,
abstraction, and forgetting, but only the kernel may enact them authoritatively.
13.4
Why Stratiﬁcation Matters
Without stratiﬁcation, ethical interpretation threatens to pollute mechanics, and observational
convenience threatens to undermine causality. Spherepop avoids both failures by making its layers
explicit.
The calculus provides the language of worldhood.
The kernel provides the machinery that
enforces it.
The view layer provides access without power.
Together, these strata ensure that
meaning accumulates irreversibly, while understanding remains ﬂexible.
This stratiﬁed design is not optional.
It is the structural condition that makes Spherepop
coherent as both a philosophy of commitment and a working system.
14
Collapse, Merge, and Equivalence as Quotienting
The concept of collapse occupies a privileged position in the Spherepop calculus. It is the only
operator that reduces historical complexity rather than increasing it, and the only operation that
explicitly trades detail for coherence. In the abstract calculus, collapse is introduced as a quotient
on option-spaces.
In Spherepop OS, this operation is realized concretely through equivalence
induction and representative normalization. This section makes that correspondence explicit.
14.1
Collapse in the Calculus
At the level of the calculus, collapse is deﬁned as an operation
collq : X →X/∼q,
13

where ∼q is an equivalence relation determined by a collapse policy q. The policy speciﬁes which
distinctions are to be preserved for future reasoning and which are to be forgotten. The deﬁning
property of collapse is universal: any morphism out of X that is insensitive to distinctions beyond
q factors uniquely through the quotient.
This formulation captures abstraction in its strongest sense. Collapse does not merely remove
options; it removes diﬀerences. Two futures that were previously distinct become identiﬁed, not
because they are impossible, but because they are no longer meaningfully distinguishable with
respect to future commitments.
14.2
Merge and Collapse in the Kernel
Spherepop OS realizes this abstract notion through a small set of kernel events, most notably
MERGE and COLLAPSE. A MERGE event induces an equivalence between two semantic objects, while
a COLLAPSE event induces equivalence over an entire region. In both cases, the kernel maintains
equivalence classes via a union-ﬁnd structure, selecting canonical representatives and normalizing
all relations accordingly.
From a semantic perspective, these operations are not additive updates but quotient construc-
tions. Once objects are merged, all references to them are rewritten to their representative, and
the distinction between the merged objects is irretrievably lost at the authoritative level. This is
precisely the behavior required of collapse in the calculus.
Importantly, objects that are no longer representatives are not deleted. They persist as histor-
ical artifacts, but they no longer participate independently in future structure. This mirrors the
calculus-level claim that collapse forgets scaﬀolding while preserving outcome.
14.3
Action Reduction and Renormalization
In the Lagrangian formulation of Spherepop, collapse is the only operator that reduces the accu-
mulated action:
S 7−→S −log | ker q|.
This reduction reﬂects the elimination of degrees of freedom that no longer contribute to future
choice.
The kernel-level realization of this principle is compaction through equivalence. When multiple
historical branches are identiﬁed, the eﬀective dimensionality of the semantic state is reduced. Re-
play remains deterministic, but the space of distinctions that must be tracked shrinks. In this sense,
collapse functions as a renormalization step on history: ﬁne-grained distinctions are integrated out,
yielding a coarser but more stable description.
This perspective clariﬁes why collapse is neither error correction nor optimization.
It is a
deliberate act of abstraction, undertaken when the cost of retaining detail exceeds its future value.
14.4
Conﬂuence and Order Independence
A critical property of quotienting operations is conﬂuence. In Spherepop OS, the ﬁnal equivalence
relation induced by a set of merge or collapse events is independent of their order. This is guaranteed
by the algebraic properties of union-ﬁnd and is formalized by merge conﬂuence theorems in the
kernel speciﬁcation.
At the level of the calculus, this corresponds to the commutativity of collapse operations that
act on independent regions. The order in which irrelevant distinctions are forgotten does not aﬀect
14

the ﬁnal world, provided that the same identiﬁcations are eventually made. This reinforces the
interpretation of collapse as abstraction rather than destruction.
14.5
Collapse versus Erasure
It is essential to distinguish collapse from erasure. Erasure deletes information outright, rendering
the past inaccessible. Collapse, by contrast, preserves history while changing how it is interpreted.
The authoritative log remains intact; only the semantic equivalence structure changes.
This distinction underwrites several of Spherepop OS's most important properties, including
deterministic replay, historical inspection, and late-joining observers. Collapse simpliﬁes the present
without falsifying the past. In philosophical terms, it enables growth without amnesia.
14.6
Summary
Collapse in Spherepop is not a metaphor, nor an implementation trick. It is a mathematically pre-
cise quotient operation that appears consistently across the calculus, the kernel, and the mechanics
of commitment. By identifying collapse with equivalence induction, Spherepop uniﬁes abstraction,
compression, and forgetting within a single formal act. This unity is what allows histories to deepen
without becoming unmanageable, and worlds to remain coherent without remaining brittle.
15
Refusal, Authority, and Non-Interference
The introduction of the refusal operator raises a legitimate concern: whether normative distinctions
risk contaminating the mechanical semantics of the system. Spherepop addresses this concern not
by weakening refusal, but by precisely locating where refusal is permitted to act. This section
clariﬁes the role of refusal by situating it within the architecture of authority and non-interference.
15.1
Geometric Equivalence and Normative Distinction
At the level of the event-history calculus, refusal is geometrically indistinguishable from pop. Both
operators induce the same restriction on the option-space:
refuset = popt
in O.
This equivalence is deliberate. The mechanics of constraint are indiﬀerent to motivation. Whether
an option is excluded instrumentally or deontically, the resulting future space is the same.
The distinction between pop and refuse therefore does not belong to the geometry of option-
spaces. It belongs to interpretation. Spherepop encodes this distinction not by altering the kernel
transition rules, but by recording it in auxiliary structures that are explicitly non-authoritative.
15.2
Refusal and the Accounting Layer
Normative information in Spherepop is carried by metadata and accounting, not by kernel state.
This separation is enforced architecturally. Kernel events alter only the authoritative semantic
substrate: objects, relations, and equivalence classes. Metadata may annotate these events, but it
is not consulted by the kernel when determining state transitions.
Formally, refusal diﬀers from pop only under an accounting functor
A : O →C,
15

which assigns cost, debt, or ethical weight to events. This functor is additive over history, aligning
directly with the Lagrangian formulation of commitment. Because A is not invertible back into
kernel semantics, ethical distinctions cannot interfere with causality.
15.3
Authority and Proposal Rejection
In Spherepop OS, the only locus at which refusal may have causal force is prior to event commit-
ment. Clients propose events; the arbiter either accepts or rejects them. A rejected proposal is
never sequenced into the authoritative log and therefore never becomes part of history.
This form of refusal is external to the kernel. It does not modify state, induce equivalence, or
alter relations. It is an exercise of authority over what may become real, not an operation within
reality itself. Once an event is committed, its semantics are purely mechanical.
This design mirrors the calculus-level distinction between refusal as a principle and pop as an
eﬀect. Refusal governs admission to history; pop governs the shape of history once admitted.
15.4
Non-Interference as a Semantic Invariant
A central invariant of Spherepop is non-interference: no structure that is not itself an event may
inﬂuence authoritative state. Views, metadata, explanations, layouts, speculative branches, and
ethical annotations are all barred from causal feedback.
Refusal respects this invariant. Its normative content is visible to observers and agents, but
opaque to the kernel. As a result, the system enjoys a strong form of semantic hygiene: ethics may
interpret mechanics, but mechanics never interpret ethics.
This asymmetry is essential. If refusal were permitted to alter kernel transitions, the system
would lose determinism and replayability.
By contrast, by conﬁning refusal to accounting and
authority boundaries, Spherepop gains ethical expressiveness without sacriﬁcing formal rigor.
15.5
Commitment Without Coercion
One consequence of this design is that refusal increases commitment without coercion.
A re-
fusal may permanently exclude futures while leaving the remaining space unconstrained. In the
Lagrangian formulation, refusal increases commitment momentum π without forcing a positive
choice. This allows agents to stabilize their world without prematurely collapsing it.
This property distinguishes refusal from optimization. Optimization selects; refusal excludes.
Spherepop treats the latter as foundational.
15.6
Summary
Refusal does not pollute Spherepop's mechanics because it is never allowed to enter them.
It
operates at the boundaries of authority and interpretation, not within the kernel. By enforcing
strict non-interference, Spherepop preserves deterministic causality while enabling a rich ethics of
commitment. Refusal is thus not a loophole in the calculus, but one of its deﬁning strengths.
16
Spherepop and Psychoanalytic Time: A Comparison with Psy-
chocinema
Recent work in ﬁlm theory and psychoanalytic criticism has emphasized the centrality of temporal
structure, absence, and retroactive meaning-making in human cognition. Helen Rollins' Psychocin-
ema provides a particularly clear articulation of this tradition, drawing on Lacanian psychoanalysis
16

to argue that cinematic meaning arises not from linear causality, but from the recursive reorgani-
zation of desire, memory, and identiﬁcation across time. While Spherepop shares certain surface
resonances with this account, the two frameworks diverge fundamentally in both their ontological
commitments and their treatment of irreversibility.
16.1
Lacanian Temporality and Retroactive Meaning
In Lacanian psychoanalysis, meaning is not ﬁxed at the moment of inscription. Instead, it emerges
retroactively through what Lacan termed apr`es-coup (deferred action). An early event acquires
signiﬁcance only in light of later symbolic articulation. In cinematic terms, a scene may be reinter-
preted by a later revelation, restructuring the viewer's understanding of what came before.
Rollins extends this logic by arguing that cinema functions as a machine for producing such
retroactive reconﬁgurations. The cut, the ﬂashback, and the re-framing shot operate not merely as
narrative devices, but as mechanisms that reorganize psychic structure. Memory, on this view, is
plastic and revisable; the past is continually rewritten by the symbolic order.
This account emphasizes discontinuity, fragmentation, and the instability of meaning.
The
subject is constituted not by accumulated commitment, but by lack—by what is missing, repressed,
or disavowed.
16.2
Superﬁcial Convergences
At a descriptive level, Spherepop appears to echo several Lacanian themes. Both frameworks reject
naive linear temporality.
Both emphasize the importance of exclusion, absence, and structural
constraint. Both treat narrative as something constructed rather than discovered.
Most notably, Spherepop's collapse operator may appear analogous to psychoanalytic reinter-
pretation: a later operation restructures the signiﬁcance of earlier distinctions. Similarly, refusal
may seem to parallel repression or foreclosure, in which certain possibilities are excluded from
conscious articulation.
However, these similarities are superﬁcial. They arise from shared concern with temporality,
not from shared ontology.
16.3
Irreversibility versus Retroactivity
The decisive diﬀerence between Spherepop and Lacanian models lies in the treatment of irre-
versibility. In psychoanalytic theory, reinterpretation is fundamentally retroactive. Meaning ﬂows
backward in time. The past is not ﬁxed; it is continuously re-signiﬁed by the present.
Spherepop explicitly forbids this. While collapse may reduce the relevance of past distinctions,
it does not alter what occurred. The authoritative history remains intact. Collapse quotients the
interpretation of the past, not the past itself. There is no mechanism by which a later event can
causally rewrite an earlier one.
Formally, this diﬀerence is captured by the directionality of morphisms. In Spherepop, histories
compose forward:
H = en ◦· · · ◦e1,
and there exists no inverse operation capable of modifying e1 in light of en. Any reinterpretation
occurs strictly at the level of views, never at the level of kernel semantics.
Thus, where psychoanalysis treats meaning as inherently unstable and revisable, Spherepop
treats meaning as cumulative and constrained.
17

16.4
Absence as Lack versus Absence as Exclusion
Lacanian theory centers lack as a constitutive absence: the subject is structured around what
cannot be symbolized. Desire arises from this structural gap. In Psychocinema, this manifests
as an emphasis on what is withheld from the image, what is left unseen, and what can only be
inferred.
Spherepop, by contrast, treats absence as an explicit act. An option is absent because it was
excluded. A future does not exist because it was popped or refused. Absence is therefore not
primordial; it is historical.
This distinction has ethical consequences.
In a Lacanian framework, the subject is funda-
mentally alienated from itself by structural lack. In Spherepop, the agent is constituted by its
commitments. What is missing is missing because it was given up, not because it was never avail-
able.
16.5
Cinema, Spectatorship, and Worldhood
Rollins emphasizes the role of the spectator in completing cinematic meaning. The viewer's psy-
chic investment retroactively stabilizes the narrative. Meaning is thus distributed across ﬁlm and
spectator, and remains perpetually open to reinterpretation.
Spherepop instead aligns meaning with worldhood.
A world is not something that can be
endlessly reinterpreted without consequence. To inhabit a world is to be bound by its history.
Spectatorship, in this sense, corresponds to the view layer of Spherepop: a space of interpretation,
projection, and re-framing that does not alter the underlying causal structure.
This distinction clariﬁes why Spherepop resists purely interpretive accounts of cognition. While
interpretation is indispensable, it must be grounded in an authoritative history if it is to constrain
action.
16.6
From Psychoanalytic Narrative to Formal Commitment
The contrast between Spherepop and Lacanian psychocinema can therefore be summarized suc-
cinctly. Psychoanalytic models privilege narrative reinterpretation over causal commitment. Sphere-
pop inverts this priority. Narrative is a derived view; commitment is primitive.
Where psychoanalysis asks how meaning emerges from lack, Spherepop asks how meaning
emerges from exclusion.
Where psychoanalysis treats the past as plastic, Spherepop treats it
as ﬁxed but compressible. Where cinema invites endless reinterpretation, Spherepop demands that
choices settle the world.
16.7
Summary
Spherepop does not deny the insights of psychoanalytic theory, nor the descriptive power of cin-
ematic models of meaning. Instead, it formalizes what those models leave implicit: that without
irreversible commitment, interpretation ﬂoats free of consequence.
By replacing retroactive re-
signiﬁcation with forward-accumulating constraint, Spherepop oﬀers a framework in which meaning
is not endlessly deferred, but responsibly constructed.
17
From Calculus to Visualization: Nested Scopes as Spatial Form
One advantage of Spherepop over interpretive or narrative frameworks is that its primitives admit
a direct spatial realization. Because the calculus is formulated in terms of nested option-spaces,
18

monotone restriction, and quotienting, it can be rendered visually without loss of semantic ﬁdelity.
This section explains why Spherepop lends itself naturally to two- and three-dimensional visual
languages based on nested bubbles or spheres, and why such representations are more than peda-
gogical conveniences.
17.1
Option-Spaces as Regions
At the core of Spherepop lies the option-space X: the set of admissible futures consistent with the
current history. Any restriction
X′ ⊆X
induced by a pop, refuse, or bind operation corresponds geometrically to the selection of a subregion.
This observation immediately suggests a spatial metaphor in which option-spaces are rendered as
regions, and events are rendered as operations that carve, constrain, or relate those regions.
In two dimensions, such regions may be depicted as nested areas or bubbles. In three dimensions,
they become volumes or spheres. Crucially, the calculus does not require that these regions be
metric or Euclidean; only inclusion and overlap matter. Visualization therefore respects topology
rather than geometry.
17.2
Nested Scopes and Worldhood
Spherepop histories generate a hierarchy of scopes. Each irreversible event narrows, reshapes, or
identiﬁes parts of the option-space, producing a nested structure:
X0 ⊇X1 ⊇· · · ⊇Xn.
This nesting corresponds directly to the intuitive notion of "being inside" a world. Earlier, less con-
strained futures surround later, more committed ones. In a spatial rendering, deeper commitment
appears as deeper nesting.
This stands in contrast to state-based diagrams, which typically depict transitions between
disjoint nodes. Spherepop's visual grammar emphasizes containment rather than succession, rein-
forcing the idea that later worlds are not alternatives to earlier ones, but reﬁnements of them.
17.3
Binding as Relational Geometry
The bind operator introduces ordering constraints without eliminating futures. Visually, this may
be represented not by shrinking a region, but by introducing structured relations within it. In
two dimensions, such relations may appear as directional constraints or layered zones. In three
dimensions, they may be rendered as oriented subvolumes or channels that impose precedence.
Importantly, binding does not collapse space; it shapes it. A visual language based on nested
spheres allows bindings to coexist with optionality, making visible the distinction between restriction
and elimination.
17.4
Collapse as Boundary Identiﬁcation
Collapse has a particularly natural spatial interpretation. When two regions are identiﬁed under
a collapse policy, the boundary between them disappears. Distinct bubbles merge into a single
region, not by deletion, but by boundary identiﬁcation.
This corresponds exactly to the quotient construction in the calculus. In a visual language, col-
lapse is experienced as simpliﬁcation: a reduction in the number of distinguishable compartments.
The viewer perceives abstraction directly, as complexity is integrated out.
19

Because collapse preserves the underlying history while altering its representation, visual col-
lapse aligns with the distinction between kernel semantics and views. The visualization changes;
the authoritative log does not.
17.5
Refusal and Protected Regions
Refusal is especially well suited to visual representation. Because it excludes options without forcing
positive choice, it may be depicted as the sealing oﬀof regions rather than their deletion. A refused
region remains visible as excluded, preserving interpretability without reopening possibility.
Such protected regions clarify the ethical dimension of refusal. They show not merely what is
unavailable, but what has been deliberately set aside. In contrast to repression metaphors, these
regions are not hidden; they are marked.
17.6
Advantages over Narrative Visualization
Traditional narrative visualization proceeds by sequencing frames or scenes. This encourages a
retrospective, interpretive mode of engagement, in which meaning is reconstructed after the fact.
Spherepop's spatial visualization instead foregrounds structure over sequence. The viewer sees at
once what is possible, what is excluded, and how constraints nest.
This diﬀerence mirrors the earlier contrast with psychoanalytic cinema. Where cinematic mean-
ing unfolds through temporal reinterpretation, Spherepop meaning is apprehended through spatial
containment. Time is present, but as depth rather than ﬂow.
17.7
Toward an Executable Visual Language
Because the visual elements correspond directly to formal constructs, a Spherepop visualization
need not be a passive diagram.
Regions may be interactive, events may be enacted by direct
manipulation, and collapse may be performed by explicit merging. In this way, the visual language
becomes an interface to the calculus rather than a commentary on it.
Such a language would allow users to reason about commitment, scope, and abstraction spa-
tially, without abandoning formal rigor. Nested bubbles and spheres are not metaphors imposed
from outside, but faithful renderings of the calculus itself.
17.8
Summary
Spherepop's suitability for two- and three-dimensional visualization follows directly from its formal
structure. Because meaning is encoded in nested scopes, monotone restriction, and quotienting,
spatial representation preserves semantics rather than distorting it. Visualization thus becomes a
natural extension of the calculus, providing an intuitive yet precise medium for inhabiting event-
historical worlds.
18
Cognitive Agents as Log-Bound Processes
With the semantic, mechanical, and visual foundations in place, we can now state a positive account
of agency within Spherepop. An agent, in this framework, is not a function from observations to
actions, nor a policy over states, but a process whose identity is constituted by an accumulating,
authoritative history. Cognition is the internal construction of that history; action is its external
projection.
20

18.1
Agents as Historical Processes
Formally, a Spherepop agent is a process that emits a sequence of events
γ = (e1, e2, . . . , en)
into an authoritative log.
The agent's identity is not given by a parameter vector or internal
conﬁguration at time t, but by the preﬁx of the log to which it is bound. Two agents that share
the same history are indistinguishable in the strong semantic sense, regardless of their internal
representations.
This deﬁnition enforces a crucial asymmetry: the agent may reason about multiple futures, but
it may inhabit only one past. Speculation is permitted; commitment is singular.
18.2
Internal Cognition as Event Simulation
Internal cognition within a Spherepop agent consists of proposing candidate events against an
internal option-space. These proposals may be explored, evaluated, or rejected, but they do not
alter the authoritative history until committed. Cognition is therefore structurally separated from
action.
Each accepted internal event transforms the agent's internal memory state:
Mt+1 = et(Mt),
where Mt is itself an option-space enriched with bindings and exclusions. Because these trans-
formations are irreversible at the semantic level, internal cognition accumulates commitment even
before external action is taken.
This model yields a form of thinking that is neither purely symbolic nor purely statistical.
Reasoning proceeds by narrowing, binding, and collapsing internal possibilities, rather than by
generating sequences of representations.
18.3
Memory as Causal Substrate
In Spherepop, memory is not a store of representations but a record of constraints. What an agent
remembers is what it has ruled out, what it has bound together, and what distinctions it has
collapsed. This memory is causally upstream of all future reasoning.
As a consequence, explanation is not a post hoc narrative imposed on behavior, but a projection
of the causal history that produced it. To explain an action is to point to the sequence of events
that made alternative actions unavailable. Interpretability thus arises from access to history, not
from transparency of internal representations.
18.4
Action as Joint Commitment
When an agent acts in the world, it performs a joint commitment: an internal event and an external
event are bound together. Internally, the agent prunes and binds its own option-space; externally,
the world's option-space is likewise constrained. Action is therefore not output, but synchronization
between histories.
An agent that cannot bind its internal commitments to external consequences remains a sim-
ulator. Conversely, an agent whose external actions do not feed back into internal history lacks
learning. Genuine agency requires both directions of constraint.
21

18.5
Refusal and Stability of Agency
Refusal plays a central role in maintaining agent coherence over long horizons. By refusing classes
of actions or interpretations, an agent creates protected regions within its option-space. These
refusals stabilize identity by preventing oscillation between incompatible commitments.
Because refusal increases commitment without forcing positive selection, it allows agents to
remain open where openness is valuable, while remaining closed where closure is necessary. This
mechanism replaces brittle optimization with resilient worldhood.
18.6
Collapse and Concept Formation
As an agent accumulates history, internal memory inevitably grows complex. Collapse provides
the mechanism by which this complexity is managed. By identifying internal distinctions that no
longer aﬀect future action, the agent forms concepts: equivalence classes over past experience.
Concept formation, in this view, is not inductive generalization over data points, but historical
compression. Concepts are the residue of many commitments collapsed into a single handle. This
explains both their stability and their context-sensitivity.
18.7
Visualizing Agent Cognition
The nested-scope visualization introduced earlier admits a direct cognitive interpretation.
An
agent's internal world may be rendered as a hierarchy of nested regions, with deeper regions corre-
sponding to more committed beliefs or plans. Refused regions appear sealed; bound regions appear
structured; collapsed regions appear merged.
Such a visualization is not merely illustrative. It provides an externalization of the agent's
internal causal structure, allowing both the agent and observers to reason spatially about commit-
ment, freedom, and abstraction. In this sense, visualization becomes a cognitive tool rather than a
reporting mechanism.
18.8
Worldhood and Responsibility
Because Spherepop agents are log-bound, they are accountable to their own histories. Actions have
consequences not only in the world, but in the agent's future self. This temporal coupling grounds
responsibility. To act is to bind oneself.
Worldhood, in this framework, is not the possession of a model of the world, but the condition
of being constrained by one's past. An agent without irreversible history may appear intelligent,
but it remains uninhabited.
18.9
Summary
Spherepop redeﬁnes agency as the capacity to construct and inhabit a history. By treating cognition
as event simulation, memory as accumulated constraint, and action as joint commitment, it oﬀers
a uniﬁed account of intelligence grounded in irreversibility. Agents are not optimizers over states,
but authors of worlds—one exclusion at a time.
19
The Agent as Endofunctor and Parser
The preceding sections have described Spherepop agents operationally and phenomenologically.
We now oﬀer a more abstract characterization that uniﬁes these views: a Spherepop agent may
22

be understood as an endofunctor on a category of option-spaces, functioning simultaneously as a
parser of events and as a transformer of worlds.
19.1
Endofunctorial Structure
Let O denote the category of option-spaces with monotone morphisms. A Spherepop agent induces
an endofunctor
A : O →O,
which maps a current world X to a more committed world A(X) by applying a sequence of irre-
versible events. The functoriality condition expresses coherence: identity histories act trivially, and
concatenation of histories corresponds to composition.
Crucially, A is not invertible. It preserves inclusion but not equivalence. In categorical terms,
it is monotone but not an equivalence. This captures the agent's essential asymmetry with respect
to time: the agent moves forward by losing possibilities.
19.2
Parsing as Commitment
Viewed internally, the agent does not merely transform worlds; it parses incoming structure. Each
perceptual or informational input is treated not as a datum to be stored, but as a proposal for
constraint. To parse is to decide which distinctions to preserve, which to bind, and which to discard.
In this sense, a Spherepop agent functions as a parser whose output is not a syntax tree, but
a transformed option-space.
Parsing is successful when it yields a committed world in which
future action is better constrained. Ambiguity corresponds to retained optionality; understanding
corresponds to exclusion.
This reframes cognition. Comprehension is not the construction of an internal representation
isomorphic to the input, but the construction of a world in which the input no longer needs to be
reconsidered.
19.3
Functorial Identity and Agency
Because the agent is identiﬁed with an endofunctor rather than a state, its identity is extensional
over histories. Two agents are the same agent if they induce the same transformation on worlds.
Internal representations, data structures, or implementations are irrelevant at this level of descrip-
tion.
This perspective clariﬁes why Spherepop agents resist cloning or resetting. Copying an agent
without copying its history produces a diﬀerent functor. Identity follows commitment, not conﬁg-
uration.
19.4
Summary
To describe a Spherepop agent as an endofunctor is to emphasize that agency is world-transforming
rather than state-transitioning. The agent parses the world by committing to it, and in doing so,
becomes inseparable from the history it constructs.
20
Sheaf-Theoretic Interpretations of Worldhood
The stratiﬁed architecture of Spherepop admits a natural interpretation in sheaf-theoretic terms.
This perspective provides a unifying language for understanding locality, global consistency, ab-
straction, and collapse, while remaining faithful to the system's commitment to irreversibility.
23

20.1
Local Worlds and Covers
Let a world X be viewed not as a single monolithic structure, but as a space admitting local
perspectives. Each local perspective corresponds to a restriction of the option-space to a subregion
or scope. The collection of such scopes forms a cover of X.
Assignments of structure to these scopes—partial histories, bindings, or visualizations—may be
regarded as sections over the cover. These sections need not agree globally. Indeed, disagreement
corresponds precisely to unresolved optionality.
20.2
Gluing as Commitment
The sheaf condition asserts that compatible local sections may be uniquely glued into a global
section. In Spherepop terms, gluing is not automatic. It is an act of commitment. To glue is to
pop distinctions that would otherwise keep local views separate.
Binding operations impose compatibility conditions between sections, while collapse enforces
gluing by identifying diﬀerences that no longer matter. A world becomes globally coherent only
insofar as the agent has committed to resolving local ambiguities.
Thus, global consistency is not a given; it is achieved through irreversible action.
20.3
Collapse as Sheaﬁﬁcation
Collapse admits a direct interpretation as sheaﬁﬁcation. Given a presheaf of local distinctions that
may fail to glue, collapse quotients the structure until the sheaf condition is satisﬁed with respect
to a chosen cover. Distinctions that obstruct gluing are identiﬁed.
This interpretation aligns precisely with the kernel semantics of equivalence induction and
representative normalization. Collapse enforces consistency by reducing resolution, not by falsifying
local data.
20.4
Views as Sections
Visualizations, explanations, and summaries correspond to sections of the sheaf over particular
covers. Diﬀerent views may emphasize diﬀerent localities, resolutions, or abstractions. Because
views are non-authoritative, they need not glue globally. Their purpose is navigation, not truth.
The authoritative history corresponds to the minimal global section obtained after all committed
collapses. Everything else is a projection.
20.5
Worldhood Revisited
From the sheaf-theoretic perspective, to inhabit a world is to live within a structure that has
been suﬃciently sheaﬁﬁed. Ambiguity remains only where commitment has been withheld. The
boundary between inside and outside a world corresponds to the boundary between glued and
unglued structure.
This framing further clariﬁes the ethical dimension of Spherepop. To refuse to glue is to preserve
plurality; to collapse is to accept unity. Both are legitimate acts, but both have consequences.
20.6
Summary
Sheaf theory provides a language in which Spherepop's core intuitions become precise. Locality
corresponds to optionality, gluing to commitment, and collapse to abstraction. Worldhood emerges
not from total information, but from the disciplined resolution of incompatibility.
24

21
Conclusion: Joy in a Finite World
This essay has argued for a reorientation of how we think about computation, cognition, and
agency. Rather than treating the world as a state to be updated or a distribution to be sampled,
Spherepop treats the world as a history to be constructed. Meaning, on this view, is not found
in representations or predictions, but in the irreversible commitments that shape what remains
possible.
We began by introducing Spherepop as an event-history calculus whose primitive operations—
pop, bind, refuse, and collapse—act directly on spaces of admissible futures. By elevating irre-
versibility from an implementation concern to a semantic axiom, the calculus reframes intelligence
as the capacity to permanently exclude, order, and abstract possibilities. The Lagrangian formu-
lation made this concrete: action accumulates through loss of optionality, commitment emerges as
conjugate momentum, and freedom is something that is spent rather than preserved.
We then showed how this abstract calculus is realized operationally through a stratiﬁed archi-
tecture. The kernel enforces determinism and authority through an append-only log; the view layer
provides interpretation without interference; and the calculus supplies meaning without execution.
This separation allows ethics, visualization, and cognition to ﬂourish without compromising causal
integrity.
Collapse, understood as quotienting, uniﬁes abstraction, compression, and forgetting
across all layers.
By contrasting Spherepop with psychoanalytic and cinematic accounts of temporality, we clar-
iﬁed what is distinctive about its treatment of meaning. Where interpretive frameworks emphasize
retroactivity and reinterpretation, Spherepop insists on forward accumulation and responsibility.
The past is not rewritten; it is compressed. Absence is not primordial lack, but the residue of
deliberate exclusion. This diﬀerence grounds an ethics of agency in which commitments matter
because they bind the future.
The discussion of visualization revealed that Spherepop is not merely compatible with spatial
representation, but naturally expressed through it. Nested bubbles and spheres render option-
spaces, scopes, bindings, and collapses directly visible. Such visual languages are not metaphors
layered atop the calculus, but faithful projections of its structure, enabling agents to reason spatially
about commitment and freedom.
We then articulated a positive account of agency. A Spherepop agent is a log-bound process
whose identity is constituted by its history.
Cognition is internal event simulation; memory is
accumulated constraint; action is joint commitment between internal and external worlds. Refusal
stabilizes identity without coercion, while collapse enables abstraction without erasure. In this
framework, to be an agent is to be accountable to one's past.
Finally, by recasting the agent as an endofunctor and interpreting worldhood through sheaf
theory, we showed how Spherepop uniﬁes parsing, cognition, and abstraction within a single math-
ematical language. Local ambiguity, global coherence, and ethical choice appear as diﬀerent aspects
of the same underlying structure: the disciplined resolution of incompatibility over time.
The joy of Spherepop lies precisely here. In a world of inﬁnite possibility, nothing matters. It
is only by giving things up—by popping futures, refusing paths, binding promises, and collapsing
detail—that a world becomes inhabitable. Joy is not found in maximal freedom, but in the relief
of commitment: the moment when possibility condenses into reality, and a ﬁnite path forward
appears.
Spherepop oﬀers neither a utopia nor a universal optimizer. It oﬀers something more modest
and more profound: a language for living in worlds that remember what they have ruled out.
25

A
Core Syntax
This appendix presents a minimal surface syntax for Spherepop. The syntax is intentionally re-
strictive: it admits no general control ﬂow, mutation, or rollback. Programs are histories.
A.1
Grammar
<program> ::= <statement>*
<statement> ::= <event> | <declaration>
<event> ::= pop <target>
| refuse <target>
| bind <target> "<" <target>
| collapse <policy>
<declaration> ::= let <name> = <expression>
<target> ::= <name> | <path>
<policy> ::= <name>
<name> ::= identifier
A.2
Syntactic Irreversibility
There is no syntax for undo, overwrite, or reassignment. Once an event is emitted, it cannot be
syntactically referenced except as history. This enforces irreversibility at the language level.
B
Abstract Syntax and Denotational Semantics
B.1
Abstract Syntax Tree
A Spherepop program is represented as a linear abstract syntax tree:
AST = [n1, n2, . . . , nk],
where each node ni is one of:
Pop(t), Refuse(t), Bind(a, b), Collapse(q).
The ordering of nodes is semantically signiﬁcant and may not be altered unless independence
can be formally established.
B.2
Denotational Semantics
Let O be the category of option-spaces with monotone morphisms. The interpretation function is:
−: AST →(X0 →Xn),
26

deﬁned compositionally by:
[n1, . . . , nk] = nk ◦· · · ◦n1.
Each node denotes a morphism in O:
Pop(t) = Refuse(t) : X →X|¬t,
Bind(a, b) : X →X[a ≺b],
Collapse(q) : X →X/∼q.
C
Lagrangian Formulation
For reference, we summarize the discrete mechanics used throughout the paper.
C.1
Conﬁguration Variable
Let Ω(X) denote the optionality of an option-space X.
C.2
Local Lagrangian
Each event et induces a local cost:
Lt = ∆Ωt + λ ∆Ct,
where ∆Ωt is geometric loss of optionality and ∆Ct is accounting cost.
C.3
Action
The action of a history γ is:
S[γ] =
X
t
Lt.
C.4
Commitment and Hamiltonian
Commitment is deﬁned as the conjugate momentum:
πt = −∂Lt
∂Ω.
The Hamiltonian is:
Ht = πt Ωt −Lt,
interpreted as remaining freedom.
C.5
Collapse
Collapse is the only operator that reduces action:
S 7→S −log | ker q|.
27

D
Categorical Glossary
Option-Space: An object representing admissible futures.
History: A compositional sequence of monotone morphisms.
Collapse: A quotient morphism identifying distinctions irrelevant to future action.
Endofunctor: An agent viewed as a world-transforming functor O →O.
Sheaf: A structure assigning local sections to scopes, with gluing enforced by commitment.
View: A non-authoritative projection of kernel state.
References
[1] Aristotle. Metaphysics. Translated by W. D. Ross. Oxford University Press, 1924.
[2] Martin Heidegger. Being and Time. Translated by John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson.
Harper & Row, 1962.
[3] Martin Heidegger. The Question Concerning Technology. In The Question Concerning Tech-
nology and Other Essays. Translated by William Lovitt. Harper & Row, 1977.
[4] Alfred North Whitehead. Process and Reality. Free Press, 1978.
[5] F. William Lawvere. Adjointness in Foundations. Dialectica, 23(3-4):281-296, 1969.
[6] Saunders Mac Lane. Categories for the Working Mathematician. Springer, 2nd edition, 1998.
[7] Steve Awodey. Category Theory. Oxford University Press, 2nd edition, 2010.
[8] Alexander Grothendieck. S´eminaire de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique du Bois Marie (SGA 1).
Springer, 1971.
[9] Saunders Mac Lane and Ieke Moerdijk. Sheaves in Geometry and Logic. Springer, 1992.
[10] Tristan Needham. Visual Complex Analysis. Oxford University Press, 1997.
[11] Tristan Needham. Visual Diﬀerential Geometry and Forms. Princeton University Press, 2021.
[12] Erik Meijer. Category Theory for Programmers. Communications of the ACM, 61(12):58-64,
2018.
[13] Erik Meijer, Maarten Fokkinga, and Ross Paterson. Functional Programming with Bananas,
Lenses, Envelopes and Barbed Wire. In FPCA '91 Proceedings. Springer, 1991.
[14] Ted Jacobson. Thermodynamics of Spacetime: The Einstein Equation of State. Physical Re-
view Letters, 75(7):1260-1263, 1995.
[15] Erik Verlinde. On the Origin of Gravity and the Laws of Newton. Journal of High Energy
Physics, 2011(4):29, 2011.
[16] Karl Friston. The Free-Energy Principle: A Uniﬁed Brain Theory? Nature Reviews Neuro-
science, 11(2):127-138, 2010.
28

[17] Rolf Landauer. Irreversibility and Heat Generation in the Computing Process. IBM Journal
of Research and Development, 5(3):183-191, 1961.
[18] Charles H. Bennett. Logical Reversibility of Computation. IBM Journal of Research and De-
velopment, 17(6):525-532, 1973.
[19] W. Ross Ashby. An Introduction to Cybernetics. Chapman & Hall, 1956.
[20] David Marr. Vision. W. H. Freeman, 1982.
[21] Robert Rosen. Life Itself. Columbia University Press, 1991.
[22] Jacques Lacan. The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis. Translated by Alan Sheri-
dan. W. W. Norton, 1978.
[23] Gilles Deleuze. Cinema 2: The Time-Image. University of Minnesota Press, 1989.
[24] Helen Rollins. Psychocinema. Polity Press, Cambridge, 2024.
[25] Alan M. Turing. On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem.
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 42(2):230-265, 1936.
[26] Jean-Yves Girard. Linear Logic. Theoretical Computer Science, 50(1):1-101, 1987.
[27] Benjamin C. Pierce. Types and Programming Languages. MIT Press, 2002.
[28] Daniel C. Dennett. The Intentional Stance. MIT Press, 1987.
29

