From Sets to Parts:
Operational Mereology via Event-Sourced Semantics
Flyxion
December 13, 2025
Abstract
Set theory has long served as the default foundational language of mathematics and com-
putation, encoding structure through element-membership relations. This paper argues that
the Spherepop calculus and kernel provide a viable alternative foundation grounded in mereol-
ogy: a theory of part-whole relations realized through operational, replayable semantics. By
replacing extensional membership with event-induced composition, Spherepop avoids several
well-known pathologies of set-theoretic foundations while retaining suﬃcient expressive power
for computation, logic, and structural reasoning.
1
The Foundational Role of Sets
Set theory has historically served as the default foundational language of mathematics and, by
extension, of formal approaches to computation (Zermelo 1908; Fraenkel 1922; Jech 2003). Within
this framework, collections are represented by sets, identity is determined extensionally by mem-
bership, structure is encoded through subsets and relations, and abstraction is achieved through
comprehension principles.
These roles are not ontologically neutral. The membership relation is global and atemporal:
whether an element belongs to a set is treated as a timeless fact, independent of any process
by which the set may have been constructed. Extensionality collapses identity to total content,
erasing distinctions grounded in construction history or operational provenance. From a logical
perspective, this necessitates elaborate axiom systems to control paradoxes arising from unrestricted
comprehension. From a computational perspective, it creates a mismatch between formal identity
and operational behavior, since real systems evolve through time and record change explicitly.
In practice, modern computing systems rarely manipulate sets in this foundational sense. They
operate on state transitions, event logs, transactional records, and replayable histories, all of which
are inherently temporal (Gray and Reuter 1993; Fowler 2005). The continued use of set theory as a
foundational language is therefore better understood as a historical inheritance than as a reﬂection
of computational necessity.
Lemma 1 Extensional membership is insuﬃcient to characterize the identity of entities whose
structure evolves through time.
1

If identity is determined solely by membership, then two entities with identical instantaneous
content must be identical.
In operational systems, however, entities with identical state may
nevertheless diﬀer in provenance, authority, or future evolution.
Membership therefore fails to
capture distinctions that are preserved in replayable, history-sensitive systems.
2
Mereology as an Alternative Foundation
Mereology replaces the membership relation with a primitive notion of parthood. Rather than
asking whether an object is an element of a set, mereology asks whether one entity is part of
another. This shift replaces a static inclusion predicate with a relational notion better suited to
composition, aggregation, and structural dependence (Leonard and Goodman 1940; Varzi 2023).
Historically, mereology has been proposed as a foundational alternative to set theory, partic-
ularly within nominalist programs seeking to avoid commitment to abstract entities such as sets
or classes (Leśniewski 1967; Goodman 1951). However, classical mereological systems are typically
presented axiomatically and timelessly. They specify general laws governing part-whole relations
without explaining how such relations arise, change, or are enforced.
As a result, mereology has often remained a conceptual alternative rather than a practical
replacement for set-theoretic foundations. What is missing is an operational account of how parts
are introduced, how wholes are constructed, and how mereological facts persist or change over time.
Spherepop supplies precisely this missing operational grounding.
Lemma 2 An axiomatic mereology without a construction semantics cannot serve as a foundation
for computational systems.
Computation requires not only structural relations but also rules governing their introduction,
modiﬁcation, and persistence. A timeless axiomatization of parthood speciﬁes constraints on com-
pleted structures but does not explain how those structures are produced or maintained by concrete
operations.
3
Spherepop's Ontological Commitments
Spherepop adopts a deliberately minimal ontology grounded in explicit construction. Objects exist
only insofar as they have been introduced by events. Relations between objects exist only insofar
as they are induced by recorded operations.
Events constitute the sole source of authoritative
change, and replay provides the mechanism by which the state of the system at any moment is
reconstructed.
There is no primitive notion of a set, no global membership relation, and no assumption of a
completed universe of discourse. Structure is not postulated; it is accumulated. The meaning of
any part-whole claim is determined by whether the replay of the event log witnesses a sequence of
operations establishing that relation.
Replay is therefore not an auxiliary interpretive tool but the central semantic mechanism of the
system. Ontological facts are inseparable from historical facts. To exist is to have been constructed;
to be related is to have been related by an event.
2

Theorem 1 Every ontological fact in Spherepop is reducible to a statement about replayed event
history.
By design, objects are introduced only by events, relations are induced only by events, and
identity modiﬁcations are recorded only by events. Replay deterministically reconstructs all such
facts from the event log. No ontological fact is introduced independently of this mechanism.
4
Part-Whole Relations as Event Semantics
In Spherepop, part-whole relations are not treated as primitive axioms but as the cumulative eﬀect
of explicit operational events. This places mereology within the semantics of execution rather than
within a timeless logical theory. Objects are introduced, related, and sometimes identiﬁed through
a sequence of recorded operations whose eﬀects persist through replay.
A POP event brings a new object into existence.
A MERGE event records that one object is
subsumed by another, thereby establishing a part-whole relation that holds until modiﬁed by
subsequent events. A LINK event introduces structured adjacency without subsumption, allowing
for relational structure that does not collapse identity. Finally, a COLLAPSE event explicitly identiﬁes
objects that were previously distinct, recording an irreversible decision to treat them as one.
The signiﬁcance of this design is that parthood is not a predicate evaluated against a completed
universe, but a historical fact witnessed by replay.
Whether an object is part of another at a
given moment depends on whether the replay of the event log up to that moment establishes a
containment path between them. Mereological facts are therefore time-indexed and contingent on
construction history.
This operationalization aligns mereology with computational practice, where structure emerges
from execution rather than from axiomatic closure (Fowler 2005; Shapiro et al. 2011).
Theorem 2 At any replay time t, the part-whole relation in Spherepop is uniquely determined by
the preﬁx of the event log up to t.
Events are the sole source of change, and replay deterministically applies them in order. Since
part-whole relations arise only from the cumulative eﬀect of these events, replay uniquely deter-
mines the induced mereology at time t.
5
Replacing Membership with Operational Containment
In set theory, the foundational structural assertion is the membership claim x ∈S, which holds
independently of any construction history. Spherepop replaces this assertion with an operational
containment relation x ≤y, which holds if and only if replay demonstrates that x has been subsumed
by, or structurally subordinated to, ythroughasequenceofevents.
This replacement eliminates unrestricted comprehension. No object exists merely because a
predicate can be formulated; objects exist only if they have been introduced by events. Likewise,
no object possesses parts it did not explicitly acquire. The consequence is a strict alignment between
ontology and construction: everything that exists has a witnessed origin.
3

Importantly, this also breaks the identiﬁcation of identity with instantaneous structure. Two
objects may induce identical part-whole graphs at a given replay point while remaining distinct by
virtue of having diﬀerent handles or diﬀerent construction histories. Structural coincidence does
not entail ontological identity.
This shift echoes nominalist critiques of set-theoretic foundations, which object to the reiﬁcation
of abstract collections without constructive grounding (Goodman 1951; Varzi 2023).
Lemma 3 Operational containment does not entail extensional identity.
If two objects have identical induced containment relations at a given replay time, then they
are extensionally indistinguishable with respect to parthood. However, unless an explicit identiﬁ-
cation event has occurred, their distinct handles and event histories remain, preserving ontological
distinction despite extensional coincidence.
6
Temporalized Identity
Set-theoretic identity is extensional and timeless: two sets are identical if and only if they have
the same members. Spherepop replaces this criterion with a temporally indexed notion of identity
grounded in construction and replay.
An object is identiﬁed by its handle, by the events that
introduced and modiﬁed it, and by the relations induced at a particular replay time.
Identity claims are therefore sensitive to time. At one replay point, two objects may be struc-
turally indistinguishable; at another, they may diverge due to subsequent events. Explicit identity
is asserted only through COLLAPSE events, which record a deliberate and authoritative decision to
treat two previously distinct objects as one.
This temporalization resolves familiar puzzles associated with extensional collapse, such as
the Ship of Theseus, by distinguishing persistence through history from instantaneous structural
equivalence (Wiggins 2001).
Theorem 3 Identity in Spherepop is a historically mediated relation rather than an extensional
equivalence.
Extensional equivalence depends solely on instantaneous structure, whereas Spherepop iden-
tity depends on handles and event history. Since event histories may diﬀer even when structure
coincides, identity cannot be reduced to extensional properties alone.
7
Authority and Mereological Disagreement
A further feature distinguishing Spherepop from classical foundations is the explicit role of author-
ity. In distributed or collaborative settings, diﬀerent agents may propose incompatible changes
to part-whole structure.
Spherepop treats such disagreement as an expected and manageable
phenomenon rather than as a logical inconsistency.
Authorities submit proposed events asserting merges, links, or collapses. An arbiter orders these
proposals, resolves conﬂicts, and commits a single authoritative sequence of events to the log. The
4

resulting mereology is therefore not absolute in a metaphysical sense but procedurally determined
by governance.
This mechanism replaces the implicit god's-eye perspective of classical set theory with an explicit
account of how ontological commitments are made. Disagreement is resolved not by appeal to
hidden axioms but by recorded decisions that are visible, inspectable, and replayable.
Theorem 4 Mereological consistency in Spherepop is enforced procedurally rather than axiomati-
cally.
Conﬂicting proposals do not directly alter the event log. Only events committed by the arbiter
aﬀect replayed state. Consistency is therefore guaranteed by the ordering and acceptance rules
governing event commitment, not by global logical constraints.
8
Interim Synthesis
Taken together, these features yield a mereology that is explicitly constructive, temporally grounded,
and authority-aware. Parthood arises from execution, membership is replaced by witnessed con-
tainment, identity is historical rather than extensional, and disagreement is resolved procedurally.
This reorientation prepares the ground for a reassessment of paradox, complexity, and abstraction,
which are addressed in the following sections.
9
Why Russell-Style Paradoxes Cannot Be Formulated
A central motivation for axiomatic set theory has been the need to control paradoxes arising from
unrestricted comprehension. RussellâĂŹs paradox is the paradigmatic case. The importance of
Spherepop in this context is not that it resolves such paradoxes by modifying axioms, but that it
prevents their formulation by eliminating the ontological and syntactic prerequisites on which they
depend.
RussellâĂŹs paradox presupposes a universal domain of objects, a primitive membership relation
applicable to all objects in that domain, and a comprehension principle allowing objects to be
deﬁned by predicates over that domain. On this basis, one deﬁnes the set
R = {x | x /∈x}
and derives a contradiction by asking whether R ∈R.
Spherepop admits none of these prerequisites. There is no universal domain of objects, but
only those objects that have been introduced by events up to a given replay time. There is no
primitive membership relation; the closest analogue is the time-indexed part-whole relation ≤t,
which is meaningful only relative to replayed history. Finally, there is no mechanism for predicate-
generated existence. Predicates may be evaluated against replayed state, but they do not introduce
new objects.
As a result, even the syntactic form of RussellâĂŹs construction is unavailable. The expres-
sion x ≤t x is not paradoxical; it is simply a question about whether replay witnesses a cycle of
5

containment. Such cycles are neither contradictory nor implicit. They can occur only if explicitly
introduced by events and are therefore visible and auditable.
Theorem 5 There exists no Spherepop expression or event sequence corresponding to the Russell
set
{x | x ̸≤t x}.
Any such construction would require quantiﬁcation over all objects, a primitive containment
predicate independent of replay, and a comprehension principle turning predicates into objects.
None of these mechanisms exist in Spherepop. Therefore the construction cannot be expressed.
The same analysis applies to other impredicative paradoxes, including the Burali-Forti paradox
and ontological readings of CantorâĂŹs diagonal argument.
In each case, paradox arises from
reifying totality into an object. Spherepop enforces a strict separation between totality as a view
and existence as a historical fact.
10
Computational Complexity: Power Sets and Event Logs
The foundational commitments of set theory carry signiﬁcant computational consequences. The
power set axiom asserts that for any set X there exists a set P(X) containing all subsets of X.
Interpreted ontologically, this commits the system to exponential structure regardless of whether
such structure is ever observed or used.
From a computational standpoint, this is untenable. Modern systems cannot aﬀord to materi-
alize, or even implicitly commit to, all possible substructures of a given entity. Spherepop replaces
this commitment with append-only event logs. Let Et denote the preﬁx of the event log up to
replay time t. The size of Et grows linearly with the number of events that have actually occurred.
State is reconstructed by replaying Et, and no object exists beyond those introduced by its events.
Structures that would correspond to subsets or collections in set theory are computed on demand
as queries over replayed state. For example, the collection of all parts of an object is not itself an
object, but the result of traversing the part-whole graph induced by replay. Computational cost is
therefore incurred only when information is requested, not merely because it could be requested.
This approach aligns with established practice in databases, version control systems, and dis-
tributed data types, all of which treat logs rather than static collections as the source of truth
(Gray and Reuter 1993; Fowler 2005; Shapiro et al. 2011).
Theorem 6 Let Et be a Spherepop event log of length n. Then the ontological size of the system
is O(n), and all derived structures are computable in time polynomial in n.
Only events contribute to existence, and there are n such events. All further structure is derived
by replay, traversal, or projection over the induced relations. No axiom or operation introduces
super-polynomially many entities.
This stands in sharp contrast to power-set semantics, where exponential structure is implicit
even when unused. Spherepop relocates complexity from ontology to computation, where it can be
controlled, optimized, and reasoned about.
6

11
Category Theory as a View Layer over Event-Sourced Mere-
ology
Category theory is often proposed as a foundational alternative to set theory because it abstracts
away from element-level detail and emphasizes compositional structure (Mac Lane 1998; Lawvere
and Schanuel 1997).
These motivations resonate with SpherepopâĂŹs rejection of membership
and its emphasis on relations. However, category theory typically presupposes a ﬁxed collection of
objects, timeless morphisms, and globally valid composition laws.
Spherepop admits categorical structure only derivatively. Given a replay time t, one may deﬁne
a graph whose nodes are object handles existing at t and whose edges are relations induced by
replay. From this graph, a category Ct may be constructed, with objects corresponding to handles
and morphisms corresponding to paths generated by links and merges. Identity morphisms arise
from trivial paths, and composition is given by path concatenation.
Crucially, this category exists only relative to replay. Morphisms are historical and contingent,
and may be invalidated or altered by later events. Associativity and identity laws hold only insofar
as replay produces a stable graph. Categorical axioms are therefore not foundational truths but
emergent invariants of well-behaved histories.
Colimits illustrate this distinction particularly clearly. In category theory, colimits are guaran-
teed by axiom. In Spherepop, a merge corresponds to a colimit only when a MERGE event has been
explicitly committed. Limits and pullbacks similarly arise as queries over replayed state rather than
as new objects, unless deliberately constructed. This mirrors database joins rather than ontological
closure.
Functors correspond naturally to views: mappings from the replay-induced category to cate-
gories of representations such as tables, graphs, or metrics. These views are time-indexed, non-
authoritative, and discardable without ontological loss. Metadata evolution induces coherent trans-
formations between such views, analogous to natural transformations, but these transformations
remain subordinate to event authority.
Theorem 7 Category-theoretic structure in Spherepop is observational rather than ontological.
Objects and relations exist independently of any categorical interpretation. Categories, functors,
and transformations are constructed from replayed state as descriptive artifacts. Removing these
interpretations does not alter the underlying ontology.
12
Interim Synthesis
Across paradox, complexity, and abstraction, a consistent pattern emerges. Set-theoretic founda-
tions encode possibility as existence, while Spherepop encodes existence as construction. Classical
foundations rely on axiomatic restriction to control inconsistency; Spherepop relies on ontological
discipline enforced by event semantics.
Where set theory commits to exponential structure by
ﬁat, Spherepop defers complexity to computation. And where category theory postulates universal
constructions, Spherepop requires those constructions to be explicitly realized.
7

These diﬀerences are not merely philosophical. They reﬂect the structural realities of compu-
tation itself.
13
Why Russell-Style Paradoxes Cannot Be Formulated
A central motivation for axiomatic set theory has been the need to control paradoxes arising from
unrestricted comprehension. RussellâĂŹs paradox is the paradigmatic case. The importance of
Spherepop in this context is not that it resolves such paradoxes by modifying axioms, but that it
prevents their formulation by eliminating the ontological and syntactic prerequisites on which they
depend.
RussellâĂŹs paradox presupposes a universal domain of objects, a primitive membership relation
applicable to all objects in that domain, and a comprehension principle allowing objects to be
deﬁned by predicates over that domain. On this basis, one deﬁnes the set
R = {x | x /∈x}
and derives a contradiction by asking whether R ∈R.
Spherepop admits none of these prerequisites. There is no universal domain of objects, but
only those objects that have been introduced by events up to a given replay time. There is no
primitive membership relation; the closest analogue is the time-indexed part-whole relation ≤t,
which is meaningful only relative to replayed history. Finally, there is no mechanism for predicate-
generated existence. Predicates may be evaluated against replayed state, but they do not introduce
new objects.
As a result, even the syntactic form of RussellâĂŹs construction is unavailable. The expres-
sion x ≤t x is not paradoxical; it is simply a question about whether replay witnesses a cycle of
containment. Such cycles are neither contradictory nor implicit. They can occur only if explicitly
introduced by events and are therefore visible and auditable.
Theorem 8 There exists no Spherepop expression or event sequence corresponding to the Russell
set
{x | x ̸≤t x}.
Any such construction would require quantiﬁcation over all objects, a primitive containment
predicate independent of replay, and a comprehension principle turning predicates into objects.
None of these mechanisms exist in Spherepop. Therefore the construction cannot be expressed.
The same analysis applies to other impredicative paradoxes, including the Burali-Forti paradox
and ontological readings of CantorâĂŹs diagonal argument.
In each case, paradox arises from
reifying totality into an object. Spherepop enforces a strict separation between totality as a view
and existence as a historical fact.
8

14
Computational Complexity: Power Sets and Event Logs
The foundational commitments of set theory carry signiﬁcant computational consequences. The
power set axiom asserts that for any set X there exists a set P(X) containing all subsets of X.
Interpreted ontologically, this commits the system to exponential structure regardless of whether
such structure is ever observed or used.
From a computational standpoint, this is untenable. Modern systems cannot aﬀord to materi-
alize, or even implicitly commit to, all possible substructures of a given entity. Spherepop replaces
this commitment with append-only event logs. Let Et denote the preﬁx of the event log up to
replay time t. The size of Et grows linearly with the number of events that have actually occurred.
State is reconstructed by replaying Et, and no object exists beyond those introduced by its events.
Structures that would correspond to subsets or collections in set theory are computed on demand
as queries over replayed state. For example, the collection of all parts of an object is not itself an
object, but the result of traversing the part-whole graph induced by replay. Computational cost is
therefore incurred only when information is requested, not merely because it could be requested.
This approach aligns with established practice in databases, version control systems, and dis-
tributed data types, all of which treat logs rather than static collections as the source of truth
(Gray and Reuter 1993; Fowler 2005; Shapiro et al. 2011).
Theorem 9 Let Et be a Spherepop event log of length n. Then the ontological size of the system
is O(n), and all derived structures are computable in time polynomial in n.
Only events contribute to existence, and there are n such events. All further structure is derived
by replay, traversal, or projection over the induced relations. No axiom or operation introduces
super-polynomially many entities.
This stands in sharp contrast to power-set semantics, where exponential structure is implicit
even when unused. Spherepop relocates complexity from ontology to computation, where it can be
controlled, optimized, and reasoned about.
15
Category Theory as a View Layer over Event-Sourced Mere-
ology
Category theory is often proposed as a foundational alternative to set theory because it abstracts
away from element-level detail and emphasizes compositional structure (Mac Lane 1998; Lawvere
and Schanuel 1997).
These motivations resonate with SpherepopâĂŹs rejection of membership
and its emphasis on relations. However, category theory typically presupposes a ﬁxed collection of
objects, timeless morphisms, and globally valid composition laws.
Spherepop admits categorical structure only derivatively. Given a replay time t, one may deﬁne
a graph whose nodes are object handles existing at t and whose edges are relations induced by
replay. From this graph, a category Ct may be constructed, with objects corresponding to handles
and morphisms corresponding to paths generated by links and merges. Identity morphisms arise
from trivial paths, and composition is given by path concatenation.
9

Crucially, this category exists only relative to replay. Morphisms are historical and contingent,
and may be invalidated or altered by later events. Associativity and identity laws hold only insofar
as replay produces a stable graph. Categorical axioms are therefore not foundational truths but
emergent invariants of well-behaved histories.
Colimits illustrate this distinction particularly clearly. In category theory, colimits are guaran-
teed by axiom. In Spherepop, a merge corresponds to a colimit only when a MERGE event has been
explicitly committed. Limits and pullbacks similarly arise as queries over replayed state rather than
as new objects, unless deliberately constructed. This mirrors database joins rather than ontological
closure.
Functors correspond naturally to views: mappings from the replay-induced category to cate-
gories of representations such as tables, graphs, or metrics. These views are time-indexed, non-
authoritative, and discardable without ontological loss. Metadata evolution induces coherent trans-
formations between such views, analogous to natural transformations, but these transformations
remain subordinate to event authority.
Theorem 10 Category-theoretic structure in Spherepop is observational rather than ontological.
Objects and relations exist independently of any categorical interpretation. Categories, functors,
and transformations are constructed from replayed state as descriptive artifacts. Removing these
interpretations does not alter the underlying ontology.
16
Interim Synthesis
Across paradox, complexity, and abstraction, a consistent pattern emerges. Set-theoretic founda-
tions encode possibility as existence, while Spherepop encodes existence as construction. Classical
foundations rely on axiomatic restriction to control inconsistency; Spherepop relies on ontological
discipline enforced by event semantics.
Where set theory commits to exponential structure by
ﬁat, Spherepop defers complexity to computation. And where category theory postulates universal
constructions, Spherepop requires those constructions to be explicitly realized.
These diﬀerences are not merely philosophical. They reﬂect the structural realities of compu-
tation itself.
17
Conclusion
This paper has argued that the foundational role traditionally played by set theory can be assumed
instead by an operational mereology grounded in event-sourced semantics. Rather than treating
collections, membership, and abstraction as primitive, the Spherepop framework replaces them
with construction, replay, and part-whole relations that are explicit, temporal, and inspectable.
The central shift is ontological as well as formal. In Spherepop, existence is historical rather
than axiomatic; identity is induced by events rather than extensional content; and structure is
something that happens rather than something that is postulated. Set-theoretic notions reappear
only as derived views over replayed state, useful for analysis but no longer foundational.
10

By examining the relationship between Spherepop and classical mereology, type theory, set the-
ory, and category theory, this paper has shown that many of the expressive strengths traditionally
attributed to set-theoretic foundations are preserved while several of their most problematic features
are eliminated. Unrestricted comprehension, power-set ontology, and impredicative self-reference
are not repaired by additional axioms; they are rendered inexpressible by design. Consistency arises
from constructional discipline rather than logical restriction.
The computational argument reinforces this conclusion. Set-theoretic foundations encode worst-
case complexity directly into ontology, committing systems to structures whose size and cost bear no
relation to actual use. Event-sourced foundations grow in proportion to what has been constructed
rather than what is merely possible. Spherepop therefore aligns foundational commitments with
the realities of computation, where history, replay, and authority are unavoidable.
Spherepop does not reject existing mathematical frameworks. Type theory, category theory,
and set theory remain indispensable descriptive tools. What changes is their status: they become
languages for reasoning about constructed structure rather than sources of existence. Foundations
are relocated from abstract universes to executable processes.
In replacing sets with parts, Spherepop does not propose a new metaphysical picture so much
as a new discipline of construction. What exists is what has been built. What is known is what
can be replayed. And what is abstract is what is derived, not assumed.
A
From Zermelo-Fraenkel Axioms to Operational Mereology
This appendix makes explicit the correspondence between the axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel set
theory and the operational mereology implemented by the Spherepop kernel. The purpose is not to
refute ZF, but to demonstrate that its axioms either become unnecessary, are realized operationally,
or are relegated to derived views.
In ZF, the primitive ontology consists of sets together with the membership relation. In Sphere-
pop, the primitive ontology consists of object handles, event records, a replay operation mapping
event preﬁxes to states, and relations induced by replay. There is no primitive membership relation;
all structure is event-induced.
The axiom of extensionality identiﬁes sets by total membership. Spherepop admits no such
global extensional equality. Two objects are identical only if they share a handle or if an explicit
COLLAPSE event equates them. Objects with identical induced parts may remain distinct if their
histories diﬀer, making identity historical rather than extensional.
The axiom of the empty set has no analogue. Spherepop has no distinguished empty object;
non-existence is represented simply by non-construction. Pairing and union correspond to explicit
construction via POP and MERGE events, with no implicit aggregation. The power set axiom has
no counterpart at all.
Spherepop deliberately forbids the automatic reiﬁcation of all possible
substructures, preventing both combinatorial explosion and non-constructive existence.
Separation and replacement survive only at the level of views. Predicates and transformations
generate queries over replayed state rather than new objects, unless explicitly materialized by
events. Foundation is enforced by temporal order: no object may depend on events that occur after
11

its creation, though explicit cycles may be introduced deliberately. Choice is realized operationally
through authority-mediated arbitration, where selections among competing proposals are explicit,
contextual, and auditable.
Theorem 11 Every ZF axiom corresponds either to an explicit construction rule, a replay invari-
ant, or a derived view in Spherepop.
Each axiom is either realized by an event type, enforced by replay order, or replaced by a query
over constructed structure. No axiom requires independent ontological postulation.
B
A Sheaf-Theoretic Interpretation of Event-Sourced Mereology
Spherepop admits a natural interpretation in sheaf-theoretic terms, which clariﬁes the relationship
between local construction, global consistency, and replay. This interpretation is not foundational
but explanatory: it provides a geometric language for reasoning about event-sourced structure.
Let the event log be totally ordered by time, and let preﬁxes of the log determine states via
replay. Consider the poset category whose objects are event preﬁxes ordered by inclusion. To each
preﬁx, associate the induced mereological structure at that replay point. This assignment deﬁnes
a presheaf of structures over the event poset.
Restriction maps correspond to replay truncation: restricting a state to an earlier preﬁx simply
forgets later events. Gluing corresponds to the consistency of replay: if two preﬁxes agree on their
overlap, then their induced structures agree on that overlap as well.
The sheaf condition expresses determinism. Given a compatible family of local states induced
by overlapping preﬁxes, there exists a unique global state obtained by replaying their union. This
captures, in geometric language, the fact that replay deterministically reconstructs structure from
history.
From this perspective, views correspond to sections of derived sheaves, obtained by project-
ing the base mereological sheaf into representational domains such as graphs, tables, or metrics.
Authority corresponds to control over which local sections are permitted to glue, enforcing global
consistency through governance rather than through axiomatic constraint.
Theorem 12 The replay semantics of Spherepop deﬁnes a sheaf over the poset of event preﬁxes.
Replay restriction deﬁnes presheaf structure.
Determinism and preﬁx compatibility ensure
unique gluing of compatible local states, satisfying the sheaf condition.
This sheaf-theoretic perspective reinforces the central thesis of the paper. Structure is local,
historical, and compositional. Global coherence is achieved not by postulating completed universes,
but by enforcing compatibility across constructed parts.
C
A BNF Grammar for the Spherepop Calculus
This appendix presents a Backus-Naur Form (BNF) grammar for the Spherepop calculus. The
purpose of the grammar is not to deﬁne the ontology of Spherepop, which is determined by event
12

semantics and replay, but to specify a concrete surface language for expressing Spherepop programs,
logs, and utilities. The grammar therefore describes admissible syntax, while semantic meaning is
supplied exclusively by replay.
The grammar is intentionally minimal. It encodes only those constructs that correspond directly
to kernel-recognized events and annotations. Higher-level abstractions, views, and derived analyses
are treated as external layers and are not part of the core calculus.
C.1
Lexical Structure
We assume an inﬁnite set of identiﬁers, written as alphanumeric strings beginning with a letter.
Literals are restricted to integers, strings, and opaque payloads whose internal structure is not
interpreted by the kernel.
Whitespace and comments are ignored except as separators.
C.2
Top-Level Structure
A Spherepop program consists of a sequence of event declarations. Evaluation of a program corre-
sponds to replaying these events in order.
⟨program⟩::= ⟨event⟩∗
The meaning of a program is the state induced by replaying all events in sequence.
C.3
Events
Events are the sole authoritative source of state change. Each event has a type and a ﬁxed arity.
⟨event⟩::= ⟨pop⟩| ⟨merge⟩| ⟨link⟩| ⟨collapse⟩| ⟨meta⟩
C.4
Object Introduction
A POP event introduces a new object handle into existence.
⟨pop⟩::= POP ⟨handle⟩
Semantically, this event asserts the existence of a fresh object identiﬁed by the given handle.
No object exists prior to such an event.
C.5
Containment and Aggregation
A MERGE event asserts that one object becomes part of another.
⟨merge⟩::= MERGE ⟨handle⟩⟨handle⟩
The ﬁrst handle denotes the part, the second denotes the whole.
The induced part-whole
relation holds at all replay times following the event, unless altered by subsequent events.
13

C.6
Relational Adjacency
A LINK event introduces a relation between two objects without subsumption.
⟨link⟩::= LINK ⟨handle⟩⟨handle⟩[⟨label⟩]
The optional label provides a typed or named relation. Links do not imply parthood and do
not aﬀect containment unless interpreted by higher-level views.
C.7
Explicit Identiﬁcation
A COLLAPSE event explicitly identiﬁes two objects.
⟨collapse⟩::= COLLAPSE ⟨handle⟩⟨handle⟩
Semantically, this event asserts that the two handles are to be treated as identical from this
replay point forward. Identity is therefore historical and explicit.
C.8
Metadata Annotation
Metadata events attach non-authoritative annotations to objects or relations.
⟨meta⟩::= META ⟨target⟩⟨key⟩⟨value⟩
⟨target⟩::= ⟨handle⟩| ⟨relation⟩
Metadata does not introduce new objects or relations.
It may inﬂuence views, queries, or
authority decisions, but has no ontological force unless acted upon by subsequent events.
C.9
Identiﬁers and Literals
⟨handle⟩::= ⟨identifier⟩
⟨label⟩::= ⟨identifier⟩
⟨key⟩::= ⟨identifier⟩
⟨value⟩::= ⟨integer⟩| ⟨string⟩| ⟨opaque⟩
C.10
Semantic Discipline
Several constraints are enforced semantically rather than syntactically:
14

An event may reference only handles introduced by earlier POP events. Replay order induces
temporal well-foundedness. No grammatical form permits predicate-generated existence. No con-
struct introduces implicit collections or totalities.
These constraints ensure that the grammar is compatible with the constructive, replay-based
mereology developed in the body of the paper.
Theorem 13 Every well-formed Spherepop program induces a unique replay state and a unique
temporal mereological structure.
The grammar permits only event sequences. Replay is deterministic, and events are the sole
source of structure. Therefore each program corresponds to a unique induced state and part-whole
relation at every replay time.
C.11
Remarks on Extensibility
The grammar presented here is intentionally minimal.
Additional surface constructs, such as
macros, control ﬂow, or query syntax, may be layered atop this core without altering its semantics.
Such extensions remain non-authoritative unless they ultimately reduce to sequences of kernel-
recognized events.
This separation preserves the foundational principle of Spherepop: syntax may be extended
freely, but ontology is ﬁxed by replay.
C.12
Summary
The BNF grammar of Spherepop deﬁnes a small, explicit, and executable calculus whose primitives
correspond directly to kernel operations. By restricting syntax to constructions that have clear
operational meaning, the grammar reinforces the central thesis of the paper: existence, structure,
and identity arise from events, not from abstraction.
D
Small-Step Operational Semantics for the Spherepop Calculus
This appendix derives a small-step operational semantics for the Spherepop calculus speciﬁed in
Appendix C. The goal is to make precise, in an execution-oriented form, the claim that all ontology
in Spherepop is induced by replay. In particular, the semantics is presented as a deterministic
transition system on conﬁgurations consisting of an event stream and a mutable replay state.
The presentation is intentionally kernel-aligned. It treats events as the only authoritative up-
dates, regards metadata as non-ontological annotation, and makes identity collapse explicit. The
semantics is not intended to replace higher-level logics or type systems; rather, it provides the
minimal execution substrate on which such systems may be interpreted.
D.1
Syntax (Recalled)
Let Evt denote the set of events generated by the grammar:
e ::= POP(x) | MERGE(x, y) | LINK(x, y, ℓ) | COLLAPSE(x, y) | META(τ, k, v),
15

where x, y range over handles, ℓranges over optional labels, τ ranges over targets (handles or
relations), and k, v are metadata keys and values.
A program is a ﬁnite sequence P = e1e2 · · · en.
D.2
Replay State and Conﬁguration
A replay state is a tuple
Σ = ⟨H, ⪯, L, ≈, M⟩,
whose components have the following intended meaning.
The set H is the set of existing handles. The relation ⪯⊆H × H is a directed relation rep-
resenting induced containment (parthood or subsumption edges). The relation L ⊆H × H × Lbl
represents labeled links. The relation ≈⊆H × H is an explicit identiﬁcation relation generated by
collapses. The component M is a partial map assigning metadata to targets.
To model representative choice induced by collapse, we assume a total function
repΣ : H →H
that maps each handle to its chosen representative under ≈. Operationally, this can be realized by
union-ﬁnd with a deterministic tie-break rule (for example, smallest handle by a ﬁxed ordering).
The semantics below is parameterized by the choice of rep, but determinism is preserved once that
choice is ﬁxed.
A conﬁguration is a pair
⟨P, Σ⟩,
where P is the remaining event sequence to be replayed and Σ is the current state.
The small-step evaluation relation is written
⟨P, Σ⟩→⟨P ′, Σ′⟩,
and its reﬂexive transitive closure is written →∗.
D.3
Auxiliary Normalization
Because collapse induces identiﬁcation, subsequent events should be interpreted modulo represen-
tatives. Deﬁne normalization of handles in an event with respect to state Σ by replacing each
handle x with repΣ(x). For brevity, we write beΣ for the normalized form of e under Σ.
Similarly, for any binary relation R ⊆H × H, deﬁne normalization under Σ by mapping all
endpoints through repΣ and removing duplicates.
D.4
Transition Rules
The rules below deﬁne →by consuming the head event and updating state.
16

POP.
x /∈H
⟨POP(x) P, ⟨H, ⪯, L, ≈, M⟩⟩→⟨P, ⟨H ∪{x}, ⪯, L, ≈, M⟩⟩
If x ∈H, the event is either treated as an error or as a no-op depending on kernel policy. For
a foundational semantics, it is useful to model it as an error; for an engineering semantics, as an
idempotent no-op. We record both options below.
POP (Idempotent Variant).
x ∈H
⟨POP(x) P, Σ⟩→⟨P, Σ⟩
MERGE.
x, y ∈H
⟨MERGE(x, y) P, Σ⟩→⟨P, Σ[⪯:= ⪯∪{(repΣ(x), repΣ(y))}]⟩
This rule records a directed containment edge from the representative of x to the representative of
y.
LINK.
x, y ∈H
⟨LINK(x, y, ℓ) P, Σ⟩→⟨P, Σ[L := L ∪{(repΣ(x), repΣ(y), ℓ)}]⟩
COLLAPSE.
x, y ∈H
⟨COLLAPSE(x, y) P, Σ⟩→⟨P, collapse(Σ, x, y)⟩
The function collapse updates ≈by identifying x and y, chooses a representative, and normalizes
the remaining relations accordingly. Formally, let Σ = ⟨H, ⪯, L, ≈, M⟩. Deﬁne
≈′ = cl(≈∪{(x, y)}),
where cl is the smallest equivalence relation containing the added pair. Let repΣ′ be the represen-
tative function induced by ≈′.
Then deﬁne
⪯′ = normrepΣ′(⪯),
L′ = normrepΣ′(L),
and update metadata by redirecting targets through representatives:
M′ = normrepΣ′(M).
Finally,
collapse(Σ, x, y) = ⟨H, ⪯′, L′, ≈′, M′⟩.
This is the operational content of identity-as-event: collapse is not a derived equivalence, but
an executed act that rewrites subsequent interpretation.
META.
the target τ is well-formed in Σ
⟨META(τ, k, v) P, Σ⟩→⟨P, Σ[M := M ∪{(repΣ(τ), k) 7→v}]⟩
17

Metadata does not aﬀect H, ⪯, L, ≈and is therefore non-ontological unless later used by authority
or view logic.
D.5
Derived Notions: Temporal Parthood
The semantics above deﬁnes the induced containment relation after replaying a preﬁx.
For a
program preﬁx P≤t = e1 · · · et, deﬁne the replayed state by
⟨P≤t, Σ0⟩→∗⟨ε, Σt⟩,
where Σ0 is the initial empty state.
Deﬁne time-indexed parthood by reachability in the induced containment graph:
x ≤t y
iﬀ
repΣt(x) reaches repΣt(y) via ⪯∗
t .
This makes explicit the earlier claim that parthood is a historical fact witnessed by replay.
D.6
Determinism and Replay Equivalence
Theorem 14 (Determinism) Fix a deterministic representative-selection policy for rep. For any
conﬁguration ⟨P, Σ⟩, there exists at most one ⟨P ′, Σ′⟩such that ⟨P, Σ⟩→⟨P ′, Σ′⟩.
Each rule matches only the head constructor of the event sequence and prescribes a unique
state update. The only potential non-determinism arises in representative choice during collapse;
once a deterministic policy is ﬁxed, the update is unique.
Theorem 15 (Replay Equivalence) If two programs share the same event preﬁx P≤t, then re-
playing that preﬁx from the same initial state yields the same state Σt.
By determinism, evaluation of the shared preﬁx proceeds via the same unique transition se-
quence, producing the same state.
D.7
Safety Properties Induced by the Semantics
The small-step semantics enforces the foundational constraints emphasized in the main text.
Lemma 4 (Existence by Construction) If x ∈Ht in the replayed state Σt, then there exists
i ≤t such that ei = POP(x).
The only rule that adds elements to H is POP. Therefore membership of x in Ht implies that
some POP(x) occurred in the preﬁx.
Lemma 5 (No Predicate-Generated Objects) There is no derivation step that introduces a
new handle except via POP.
Inspection of the transition rules shows that only the POP rule updates H. All other rules update
only relations or metadata.
18

Lemma 6 (Explicit Identity) If repΣt(x) = repΣt(y) and x ̸= y, then some COLLAPSE event
relating the equivalence classes of x and y occurred at or before time t.
Handles become identiﬁed only by updates to ≈, and only COLLAPSE modiﬁes ≈.
D.8
Summary
The small-step semantics provides a concrete, execution-aligned foundation for the philosophical
claims advanced in the paper. It formalizes the principle that ontology is induced by replay, that
parthood is time-indexed and constructed, that identity is explicit and historical, and that metadata
is non-ontological unless elevated by further events or governance. Higher-level logical, categorical,
or sheaf-theoretic interpretations may be layered on top of this semantics, but none are required
for the core meaning of the calculus.
References
[1] E. Zermelo. Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I. Mathematische Annalen,
65:261-281, 1908.
[2] A. Fraenkel. Zu den Grundlagen der Cantor-Zermeloschen Mengenlehre. Mathematische An-
nalen, 86:230-237, 1922.
[3] T. Jech. Set Theory. Springer, 3rd edition, 2003.
[4] S. Leśniewski. On the Foundations of Mathematics. In S. McCall (ed.), Polish Logic 1920-1939.
Oxford University Press, 1967.
[5] H. S. Leonard and N. Goodman. The Calculus of Individuals and Its Uses. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 5(2):45-55, 1940.
[6] N. Goodman. The Structure of Appearance. Harvard University Press, 1951.
[7] A. C. Varzi. Mereology. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Winter 2023 Edition.
[8] E. Husserl. Logical Investigations, Vol. II. Routledge, 2001.
[9] D. Wiggins. Sameness and Substance Renewed. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
[10] J. Gray and A. Reuter. Transaction Processing: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann,
1993.
[11] M. Fowler. Event Sourcing. martinfowler.com, 2005.
[12] M. Shapiro, N. Preguiça, C. Baquero, and M. Zawirski. Conﬂict-Free Replicated Data Types.
SSS 2011, LNCS 6976.
[13] S. Mac Lane. Categories for the Working Mathematician. Springer, 1998.
[14] F. W. Lawvere and S. Schanuel. Conceptual Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
19

